================================================================================
AL-MAQRIZI
TOPOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL DESCRIPTION OF EGYPT
(Description topographique et historique de l'Egypte) -- Parts 1 and 2
French translation from the Arabic by Urbain Bouriant.

COMPLETE ENGLISH TRANSLATION (in progress)
================================================================================

NOTE ON THIS EDITION
--------------------
This is a complete English rendering of Urbain Bouriant's French translation of
al-Maqrizi's "Khitat" (the Mawa'iz wa-l-i'tibar fi dhikr al-khitat wa-l-athar).
The source is the Bibliotheque nationale de France (Gallica) scan.

The printed volume contains, at its front, both Bouriant's preface and a sample
of an older partial translation by Quatremere. The full Bouriant translation of
the work itself begins after these (at the section headed "In the name of God,
the Compassionate..."). This English edition translates the work proper in full,
in order.

Conventions: Arabic names and terms keep Bouriant's transliteration. Footnotes
are gathered at the foot of each page block. Markers like [PDF p. NN] and, where
printed, [printed p. NN] are given for cross-reference against the scan. Hijri
dates carry Bouriant's Western equivalents where he supplied them.

================================================================================


THE WORK OF AL-MAQRIZI

[Maqrizi's Preface]

[PDF p. 34]

In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.

Praise be to God, creator of knowledge and intelligence, who has taught men what
they did not know. He has heaped upon his servants material and spiritual
benefits; through his growing goodness he has spread over them goods ever greater
and ever repeated. He has sent them upon the earth, where for a time they spread
abroad, granting them as their portion his riches, which they enjoy. To some he
has given to pursue knowledge and learning, urging them to range the fields of
meditation and to traverse the plains of the intellect; to others he has inspired
the thought of renouncing created things to devote themselves to him, prompting
them to lean upon him in all things. He has kept some far from every generous and
fine action, surrounding them with companions who drag them toward all that is
shameful and base. He has obstructed the hearts of others to the point that they
can scarcely understand a word; he has set them far from the path of virtue, so
that they have neither strength nor power. Then all of them, without distinction,
he has destined to vanish and to leave the abode of tribulation and trial for the
domain of death and affliction; and he will make them all enter the abode of
recompense,

[PDF p. 35]

where each will have to answer for his acts and will be questioned on what was
given and granted to him, as well as on the state in which he presents himself
before Him (may he be adored!) and on what he has prepared for that presentation.
God will not be questioned on his acts, but men will be questioned on theirs.

I praise him, and my praise is that of a man who knows that one serves no God but
him, sole creator of creatures; my praise demands of him a redoubling of
benefits, and my gratitude grows as his benefits are renewed.

May God grant his blessing to our lord Mohammed, his servant and his apostle, his
prophet and his beloved, the lord of men and the best of those who have passed and
are no more; he who united in his person the perfection of character and of acts;
he who, above all men, merited the name of the Perfect! He was [a prophet while
Adam was still between water and clay; God sent him to all mankind and sealed
through him the line of the prophets, and blessed his family and his companions
until the day of judgment.]

[PDF p. 36]

The science of history is one of the most important of sciences, and the one that
enjoys the greatest consideration among intelligent people, because of its merit
and its value; for it contains examples and lessons, teaching man that he must
leave this world for the other; it recounts noble actions so that one may model
oneself on them, and makes known shameful acts so that intelligent people may
avoid them. Always generous souls are drawn toward it, and elevated minds take
pleasure in it and love it. The sages have composed a number of works on this
subject, and the writers of the elite have inserted in their books a quantity of
passages relating to it.

Egypt is my native land; it is there that my comrades played and that my family
was gathered; it is the abode of my friends and my companions, the homeland of
those dear to me and of my passing acquaintances; the nest in which my wings grew
and where my poverty perched; and it is of that nest alone that the soul loves to
remember. Since knowledge touched me and God gave me reason and intelligence, I have never
ceased to attach myself to the knowledge of the accounts concerning Egypt and to
take pleasure in drawing from its wells, questioning travelers about the
inhabitants of its regions. I have written in my own hand over long years, and
from all I have written I have drawn useful observations that will be found in no
book and that no binding holds, so rare and strange are they. But all this is
presented without methodical arrangement and has not the regularity of a cloth on
the weaver's loom. I wished to give an overview of what the regions of Egypt
contain in the way of monuments left to us by vanished peoples and bygone ages;
of what survives at Fostat-Masr in the way of monuments, not to speak of those
that time and age have nearly destroyed, whose faint still-visible traces will
soon be the prey of destruction and oblivion.

[PDF p. 37]

I speak also of the remains of magnificent palaces met with in the city of Cairo,
of the quarters and grounds that compose it, of its superb buildings, with an
overview of the illustrious people who founded them and a notice on the great and
venerable persons who completed them. I have strewn the whole with pleasant
anecdotes and with noble, elevated reflections, without lengthening or amplifying,
but without too much abridging or cutting short either, which would have made me
miss the aim; I have instead kept the just mean between these extremes and traced
my path there.

For all these reasons, I have named my book: THE BOOK OF COUNSELS AND EXAMPLES
CONCERNING THE QUARTERS AND THE MONUMENTS. I hope, God willing, that it will be
welcomed by kings and not rejected by the common people and the poor. The
accomplished scholar will praise it, and it will be admired by the beginning
student; it will find favor with the pious believer and be listened to kindly by
the heedless and brazen young man; the idle and the rich will receive it as a
diversion, while sensible and wise people will take it as instruction and as
example -- for they will see in it the proof of God's admirable power in the play
of vicissitudes, and will learn the marvels of the operations the Lord sets in
motion in moving things from one fortune to another.

[PDF p. 38]

If I have succeeded in my compilation, if I have brought my undertaking to a good
end, I owe it to the great munificence of God, to the excellence of his goodness,
to the abundance of his benefits toward me, to the extent of his favors. If, on
the contrary, I have failed in my design, if I have committed errors in my work --
for who, more than man, is subject to err and to falter, if he is not guided and
sustained by him who knows the most hidden things?

    I do not conceal from myself that I am a man
        who sins and errs if Providence does not preserve him.
    And you will find no one easier to excuse, among people liable to error,
        than him who makes this confession: "I am a man."

Let the reader of this book cast over the author the hem of his robe, if some
error passes before his eyes; let him show himself indulgent and obliging if he
meets there some misstep or some chip. What horse, however excellent, does not
stumble? What sword, were it of the best steel of the Indies, does not grow dull
and chip? Especially when the mind is preoccupied with a thousand things, when
resolution gets entangled in difficult affairs, when the intelligence is darkened
by the misfortunes of this somber time, and when the heart is oppressed by the
succession of woes and the redoubling of calamities.

    My time persecutes me like an enemy,
        and each day it presents itself to me with a terrible blow;
    if I desire a thing, it is the contrary it brings me,
        and if it smiles on me one day, the next it is somber toward me.

O my God, I ask your pardon; it is not out of bitterness

[PDF p. 39]

that I complain, nor out of revolt against fate: it is the groan of the sick man
and the sigh of the wounded man, who relieves himself by exhaling his pain and his
laments and finds a soothing of his ills by sharing with others his sobs and his
complaints.

    If one looked between my ribs and my entrails,
        one would see traced upon my liver a line from the book of love.
    And if one felt what I have met with of love,
        one would excuse me, or I would find an excuse for others.

Of God I ask that he grant this book a good reception among intelligent and
learned people; that he preserve it from passing through the hands of the envious
and the ignorant; that, for this work and for others, he guide me in the best
path, for he is my support -- and what better protector can I have? In him, in his
power, is my consolation in all misfortunes; in him my confidence in every event.
There is no God but him! He alone is to be revered!

   INTRODUCTION

   OF THE EIGHT PRINCIPLES

[PDF p. 40]

Before beginning a work, the ancient masters were accustomed to set out eight
principles, namely: the aim of the book, its title, its usefulness, its category,
the names and qualities of its author, its genre, the number of its parts, and
the various sources of information used to compose it. We will therefore say:

The aim of this work is to gather the scattered documents concerning the land of
Egypt and the vicissitudes of its inhabitants, and to form, by this assembling, a
whole that allows one to know the totality of the history of the provinces of
Egypt -- so that an intelligent man, having become acquainted with it, will be
able at all times to recall the monuments that still survive in Egypt and those
that have disappeared; he will be able to recount the fortunes of its earliest
occupants and its inhabitants, the course of their history and all that attaches
to it, and that in a continuous manner, according to the general usefulness that
can be drawn from these monuments.

Title of this book (that is, the name I have given it). -- Having collected the
documents on Egypt, documents I found scattered and confused, it was very
difficult for me, once they were gathered, to classify them either in
chronological order -- because of the uncertainty of the period in which each fact
occurred, especially for the earliest period -- or in alphabetical order, for
other reasons,

[PDF p. 41]

which anyone who goes through this book will readily perceive. That is why I have
dispersed them within the accounts relating to the quarters and the monuments; in
this way, each part of this work contains all that concerns it and relates to it.
Having adopted this method, I have gathered what was scattered on all sides in the
way of documents on Egypt, without fear of repeating myself when the occasion
required it, according to a plan that will please the learned man; nor will it be
disagreeable to the intelligent and cultivated man to find in each chapter all
that relates to it, without having to resort to the others. For all these reasons,
I have named this work: THE BOOK OF COUNSELS AND EXAMPLES, CONCERNING THE QUARTERS
AND THE MONUMENTS.

The usefulness of this book emerges clearly from the proposed aim and from its
title; I mean by this that in a very short time a man will be able to gain an
overview of the events that took place on the land of Egypt and of all the changes
that occurred there over long periods of time and over many years; in reflecting
on them, his soul will be purified, his character will become better; he will love
the good and put it into practice; he will hate evil and flee it. He will
recognize the fragility of this world and learn to detach himself from it to turn
toward what is imperishable.

Category of this work. -- It belongs to the whole of one of the two divisions of
the sciences, which are the intellectual and the positive. One should therefore
take pleasure in reading it and reflecting on the lessons it presents only after
having well grasped what it is necessary to know of these two sciences: the
intellectual and the positive. For every man whose heart God does not blind and
whose eyes he does not darken will, by reflecting, come to know how men like
himself, after having possessed riches and armies, arrived at death and nothingness.
This work therefore takes its place after the knowledge of the intellectual and
positive sciences, for through it one learns how those who came before us ended.

Name and quality of the author. -- His name is Ahmed ben Ali ben Abd el-Qader ben
Mohammed, but he is known under the name of El-Maqrizi. He was born at Cairo, in
the land of Egypt, after the year 760 [3 December 1358 to 22 November 1359] of the
era of the hijra of

[PDF p. 42]

Mohammed. As for his rank in the sciences, it is sufficiently established by this
book and by other works he has composed and written.

Science to which this book relates. -- It belongs to the historical science, whose
aim is to make known the dogmas established by God, to preserve the traditions of
his prophets and apostles, and to record their maxims, by which those whom God
assists are led to serve him, to obey him, and are preserved from disobedience
toward him. This science transmits the annals of the kings of old and of the
pharaohs; it explains how the divine wrath was unleashed upon them for having
performed acts forbidden to them; it is through it that creatures -- that is, men
-- have been able to know the sciences and arts set down in writing, and to learn
what happened in distant regions, in the most far-off countries, and many other
things whose value is undeniable. Every people, Arab or foreign, despite the
diversity of customs and the divergence of religions, possesses annals known to
all, very widespread and celebrated among them; in every inhabited country events
have occurred that are always known to the scholars of that country. Had I wished
to investigate all that has been written on this subject by Arab and foreign
scholars, the number would have been so great that merely to enumerate it would
have far exceeded the limits of human power.

The number of the parts of this work is seven. The first comprises the general
history of the land of Egypt, the various states of its Nile, its taxes, its
mountains; the second embraces a great number of its towns and the races that
inhabit it; in the third is set out the history of Fostat-Masr and of its kings;
the fourth turns on the history of Cairo, of its founders and the monuments they
raised; the fifth contains the description of the various states through which
Cairo and its surroundings have passed; the sixth treats of the citadel of the
mountain and of its kings; finally, in the seventh are enumerated the causes that
brought about the ruin of the provinces of Egypt. Each of these seven parts is
divided into a certain number of chapters.

Sources of information used for this work. -- I have, for my part, followed three
methods: extracts from scholarly books, accounts of elders or high personages I
was able to meet, and the relation of facts of which I was an eyewitness. For the
extracts from the compilations composed by the doctors on all sorts of

[PDF p. 43]

sciences, I note, at each citation, the work from which I drew it, to safeguard my
responsibility and protect myself from all reproach; many people, my contemporaries
and living in the same city as I, by reason of their slight scientific culture, the
narrowness of their historical knowledge, and the ignorance in which they are of
what men have repeated, bitterly deny what they do not know; in fairness they ought
to recognize that the ignorance is on their side. Besides, the science treated in
this book is not a decisive science nor indispensable to religion. It suffices for
the scholar to know what has been said on this subject and to base himself on it. --
When it is a matter of accounts from people of quality or from elders I was able to
converse with, I have most often given the name of the narrator, unless it seemed to
me useless or I had forgotten it -- but these circumstances are rare. -- As for what
I have seen myself, I hope, thank God, that no one will charge me with falsehood or
suspect my good faith.

Concerning the eight principles, I have said all that it was necessary to say. It
remains only for me to march toward my goal. My plan is to condense (in a single
chapter) all that can be said on any quarter or any monument; in this way, the
knowledge of the facts relating to it will be more complete and therefore more
useful, being easier to grasp. God leads whom he pleases in the straight path, and
more than all the learned he is learned.

The first who occupied himself with the quarters and monuments of Egypt and treated
of their origins in a special book was Abou Omar Mohammed ben Youssef el-Kandi;
after him, the cadi Abou Abd Allah Mohammed ben Salamat ben el-Qoda'i wrote his book
entitled: Selection of Accounts on the Quarters and the Monuments. This writer died
in 457 [13 December 1064 to 2 December 1065], before the years of misery. Most of
the monuments he mentions have disappeared, and there remain only ruins and deserted
spots; this disaster was the consequence of the years of misery of Mostanser, from
the year 457 to 464 [29 September 1071 to 17 September 1072], during which raged
famine

[PDF p. 44]

and plague. The inhabitants perished, the country became uncultivated, the situation
of Egypt changed. Desolation spread over Amal Foq (the upper district), from one end
to the other and on both sides of Fostat, to the west and the east: to the west,
from the bridge of the Beni-Ouaïl, where the Ouaraqat (paper-mills) are today, near
the Gate of the Bridge, outside the city of Masr, as far as the hill known under the
name of Er-Rased, going toward the great cemetery; to the east, from the point of
the Birket-el-Habech that borders the cemetery as far as the vicinity of the mosque
of Ahmed ibn Touloun. Shortly after, the emir el-gouïouch Badr el-Gemali entered
Masr in the year 466 [6 September 1073 to 27 August 1074]. The buildings were
destroyed; the country was empty of its inhabitants, of those who had lately
animated it; famine and plague had annihilated them; death and devastation had
dispersed them. There remained in Masr only remnants of men, like the dead, with
pale faces and features altered (by hunger) because of the exaggerated price of
food, of the fear the soldiers inspired in them, and of the ravages caused by the
tribes of negroes and of the Maliha; no one was found to sow the lands, and
moreover the roads were cut off by river and by land, and one could travel only
under good escort and at great expense. Cairo too was deserted and in ruins; Badr
el-Gemali authorized the men of the army, the Maliha and the Armenians, as well as
all who could do so, to build as they saw fit in Cairo with the materials coming from
the houses of Fostat, left empty by the death of their inhabitants. They therefore
set about demolishing the dwellings of Fostat and, with the materials thus obtained,
building others in Cairo. That was the first time Cairo was divided into quarters. --
The one who, after El-Qoda'i, occupied himself with the quarters and their description
was his disciple Abou Abd Allah Mohammed ben Barakat, in an excellent work in the
course of which he makes known to El-Afdal Abou-l-Qassem, son of the emir el-gouïouch
Badr el-Gemali, certain sites that, formerly waqf properties, had been usurped and
occupied by private persons. Later the sharif Mohammed ben As'ad el-Gouani wrote a
book entitled: The Point of Elucidation of the Most Unknown Quarters. In this book he
gives the description of unknown buildings and ruined monuments. -- The last who
treated of the matter was the cadi Tag ed-din Mohammed ben Abd el-Ouahab ben
el-Mou-

[PDF p. 45]

tawwag. In his work entitled: Instruction of the One Who Meditates and Awakening of
the One Who Sleeps, concerning the quarters, he gives a general overview of the
various states of Masr and its quarters down to the year 720 and some. The localities
he describes were, subsequently, for the most part destroyed by the scourge of the
year 749 [1 April 1348 to 21 March 1349], then by that of the year 761 [23 November
1359 to 11 November 1360] and the famine of 776 [12 June 1374 to 2 June 1375]. -- The
cadi Mahi ed-din Abd Allah ben Abd ez-Zaher wrote the book entitled: The Verdant and
Flowering Garden concerning the Quarters of the Cairo of Moez, in which he opens a
quite necessary door. Since the time of this writer, the population of Cairo and its
suburbs became such, in the time of En-Naser Mohammed ben Qalaoun, that the city
could scarcely contain its inhabitants. So it remained until the unleashing of the
scourges of the year 749 and of the year 761 and the famine of 776. A great number of
dwellings fell into ruins, and when the calamities and trials of the year 806 [21
July 1403 to 9 July 1404] arrived, devastation spread over Cairo, over Masr, and over
the generality of the provinces of Egypt. And if it please God, in speaking of each
quarter, I will set out as best I can what concerns it.

================================================================================
PART ONE
CONTAINING THE GENERAL HISTORY OF THE LAND OF EGYPT, THE VARIOUS STATES OF ITS
NILE, THE ENUMERATION OF ITS REVENUES, AND THE DESCRIPTION OF ITS MOUNTAINS
================================================================================

CHAPTER I
A GLANCE AT THE FIGURE OF THE HEAVENS

[PDF p. 46]

Egypt being only a fraction of the earth, it is well, before speaking of its
situation on the earth and of the place the earth occupies in the universe, to
cast a glance at the universe itself; after which I will speak of the form of the
earth, of the distribution of its climes; then I will treat of the situation of
Egypt on the earth, of the place it holds among the climes, of its limits, its
origins, its relations with religion, its marvels, its treasures, the character of
its inhabitants, its Nile, its canals, its nomes, its revenues -- in short, all
that touches it -- and all this before arriving at the subject of the book, which
is to describe the quarters of Masr and of Cairo.

The science of the stars comprises three parts: (1) the knowledge of the structure
of the heavens, of the number of the stars, of the constellations of the Zodiac,
of their relative distances, their extent, their movement -- this science bears
the name of astronomy; (2) the science of the astronomical tables and that of the
calendar; (3) the knowledge of the influences exerted by the celestial revolutions
and the rising of the zodiacal constellations on future events -- this science is
called astrology. My intention is to present here the few notions of astronomy
necessary for understanding what is to follow.

[PDF p. 47]

The heavenly bodies are spherical bodies; according to the observations of the
scholars, one counts a thousand and twenty-nine of them, dividing into two
categories: the moving stars and the fixed stars. The moving stars (planets) are
seven in number: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon;
their names have been combined in a single verse. [Footnote: this verse has, in
reality, no meaning; it is an example of the mnemonic devices used among the
Arabs, such as were once current among us. Quatremere, in his fragment of
translation of Maqrizi reported above, thought fit to render it thus: "Saturn
(Jupiter) has bought his Mars from his Sun, and Moons (Venus) have been lit by
Mercury." According to Maqrizi's own explanation, the word khanis has the complex
sense of "to slip away and reappear."]

These seven heavenly bodies are called el-khounnas (the fugitives), and it is of
them, it is said, that God meant to speak when he said: "Truly, I swear by the
fleeing ones (that is) the skiffs that hide themselves" (Koran, LXXXI, 15), and in
this other passage: "the regulators of things" (Koran, LXXIX, 5). They are called
fugitives because of the straightness of their back-and-forth movement, and it is
said that they hide themselves because they run across the constellations then
hide, that is, slip away as the gazelle does. This name of fugitives who slip away
is given to five planets, those other than the Sun and the Moon. This name comes
to them from the word khunus (the act of slipping away), synonymous with ikhtifa'
(disappearance). In the traditions it is said: "When Satan suggests something to a
believer, if the latter pronounces the name of God, Satan flees (yakhnis)," that
is, disappears, then returns. The name of khanis was therefore given to these
heavenly bodies to signify their return. They were named khunnas from the
expression "the gazelle slipped away" when it has returned to its lair, that is,
its dwelling. This name was therefore given to these bodies because of their
disappearance into the light of the Sun. These bodies are also called "the
bewildered," because at times they apparently abandon their movement from east to
west to move from west to east, and this backward march makes them resemble madmen.
The name given to each of the planets is drawn, it is said, from its own essence.
Saturn comes from the expression "so-and-so lingered" when he has stayed

[PDF p. 48]

behind. It was so named because of the slowness of its march. It is said that the
word also signifies "hatred," and, according to common opinion, Saturn
predisposes to that passion. It is of it, it is said, that this word of God
concerns: "By the heaven and the nocturnal star. How will you recognize the
nocturnal star? It is the star that hurls darts." (Koran, LXXXVI, 1-3.)

The name of Jupiter comes to it from its beauty, as if it had bought beauty for
itself alone, or because it is the star of commerce. It influences, it is said,
success and wealth. -- The name of Mars comes from the word markh (a kind of tree
whose wood, by rubbing two pieces against each other, produces fire); it was so
named because of its reddish glow. One also calls "marikh" a barbless arrow which,
once shot, does not follow a straight line; so it is with Mars, whose course is
very twisting; that is why it is claimed to have an influence on slyness (?). --
The Sun was so named because it occupies the middle between the three superior
planets above it and the three inferior planets below it. This name was given to
it for the reason that the middle of a necklace is called shams. -- The name of
Venus is drawn from the word zaharah, which means "the most dazzling white." --
Mercury (Otared) means "the one who accomplishes all things"; that is why this
name was given to the planet; it is also called "the scribe," for it has a great
influence on the heavenly bodies that neighbor it or are in relation with it. The
name of the Moon (qamar) is drawn from the word qumrah, which means "the white"
(noun), aqmar meaning "white" (adjective).

Saturn also bears the name of Kiouan; Jupiter those of Tebr and Bergis; Mars that
of Bahram; the Sun that of Mohr; Venus those of Aïahid and Sadaht; Mercury that of
Hermes; and the Moon that of Mah. All these names have been combined in a single
distich, which is this:

    You will never cease to subsist and to rise
        as long as the heavens last, for the seven regulators:
    Mohr, Mah, Kiouan, and Tebr too,
        and Hermes, and Aïahid, and Bahram.

[PDF p. 49]

They are given this title because these seven heavenly bodies surpass the other
stars of the sky, which are called the fixed stars because of their fixity in one
same point of the sky, or, according to others, because of the slowness of their
march -- for, it is claimed, they need thirty-six thousand solar years to complete
their revolution in the firmament; whereas each of the seven planets has its
particular firmament. The firmaments are spherical bodies, transparent and
concentric. They are nine in number, of which the nearest to us is the firmament
of the Moon; after it comes the firmament of Mercury, then that of Venus, that of
the Sun, those of Mars, of Jupiter, of Saturn; then comes the firmament of the
fixed stars, which comprises all the heavenly bodies visible in the sky except the
seven planets; and beyond the firmament of the fixed stars is the enveloping
firmament, which is the ninth; this last is given the name of Atlas, or of the
firmament of firmaments, or firmament of the universe. There is no agreement about
the firmaments: some call them "heavens," and, according to others, the two are
quite different things; in the view of some, they are spherical; not at all,
according to the view of others.

The eighth firmament bears the name of "throne," and the ninth that of "canopy."
Many other things are said. This ninth firmament turns continually like a
pivoting cabinet and completes one turn in exactly twenty-four hours. This turn is
always made from east to west and carries along in its movement the eight other
firmaments and the heavenly bodies they comprise; this rotation is determined by
the circular movement of the ninth firmament, which produces night and day. The
day is the span of time during which the Sun remains above the horizon of the
Earth, and the night the span of time during which the Sun remains below that same
horizon.

The firmament of the fixed stars is divided into twelve parts, like the slices of
a watermelon. Each of these divisions bears the name of a sign of the Zodiac
(constellation). These signs are: the Ram, the Bull, the Twins, the Crab, the Lion,
the Ear (of grain / Virgo), the Balance, the Scorpion, the Bow (Archer), the
Capricorn, the Bucket (Aquarius), and the Whale (Pisces). Each of these twelve
constellations is divided into thirty parts named "degrees"; each of these thirty
degrees is divided into sixty parts called "minutes"; each of these sixty minutes
is divided into sixty parts named "seconds," and so on into "thirds," "fourths,"

[PDF p. 50]

"fifths," up to "twelfths" and beyond. A series of three constellations forms a
season, and it is according to this division that time is divided into four seasons:
spring, summer, autumn, and winter. The points of orientation are also four: east,
west, north, and south. Likewise there are four elements: fire, air, water, and
earth, and four states: the hot, the cold, the humid, and the dry. One counts also
four humors: bile, black humor, phlegm, and blood, and four winds: the east wind,
the west wind, the north wind, and the south wind. Three constellations belong to
spring; they are ascending in the north, and during their span the days are longer
than the nights: these are the Ram, the Bull, and the Twins. Three others belong to
summer; they are descending in the north, and during their span the nights gain on
the days: these are the Crab, the Lion, and the Ear. The next three belong to
autumn; they are descending in the south, and during their span the nights are
longer than the days: these are the Balance, the Scorpion, and the Bow. Finally, the
last three belong to winter; they are ascending in the south, and during their span
the days gain on the nights: these are the Capricorn, the Bucket, and the Whale.

The enveloping firmament, as we have said, turns continually like a reel, always
moving from east to west above the Earth and from west to east below it; there is
always above the Earth half the sky, that is, six constellations comprising 180
degrees, the other half, with the six other constellations and 180 degrees likewise,
remaining below. And each time one of these degrees -- whose total number is 360 --
rises above the terrestrial horizon in the east, the one diametrically opposite it,
belonging to the seventh constellation, descends below the western horizon. So that
always six constellations appear during the day and the six others during the night.
The horizon is the terrestrial line that separates the apparent part from the hidden
part of the sky. The firmament turns on two poles, north and south, as the millstone
turns supported by two supports. A circular line divides it into two parts, situated
at equal distance from the two poles; this circle is called the equinoctial circle;
it cuts the circle of the constellations, and the latter cuts the equinoctial circle
in such a way that one of the halves of the first circle inclines about 24 degrees
toward the north. In this half are found

[PDF p. 51]

the six northern constellations, from the Ram to the Ear. The other half, on the
contrary, moves away from it and inclines as much toward the south; in this one are
comprised the six southern constellations, from the Balance to the Whale. The two
points of intersection of the two circles -- that is, of the equinoctial circle and
the circle of the sky of the constellations -- are the two equinoctial points:
these are the initial point of the Ram and the initial point of the Balance. The
revolution of the Sun, the Moon, and all the stars is accomplished parallel to the
circle of the firmament of the Zodiac (the ecliptic) and not to the equinoctial
circle. The Sun passes to the equinoctial circle only on its arrival at the two
equinoctial points, which are the points of intersection of the two circles. It
thus traces the equatorial line, beneath which the time is invariable, the night
not prevailing over the day nor the day over the night. For on this line the Sun
radiates at equal distance from north and south. The Sun traverses the firmament
and crosses the twelve signs of the Zodiac in about 365 1/4 days; this span of time
forms the solar year. It sojourns in each of these signs for thirty days and a
fraction of a day. During the day it remains constantly above the Earth; it is the
contrary during the night. As long as it stays in the six northern constellations
-- that is, the Ram, the Bull, the Twins, the Crab, the Lion, and the Ear -- it
rises in the atmosphere very near the zenith; this is the time of spring and summer.
When it is in the southern constellations -- that is, the Balance, the Scorpion, the
Bow, the Capricorn, the Bucket, and the Whale -- it is the time of autumn and
winter; the Sun lowers and moves away from the zenith.

Ouahb ben Monabbeh claims that the first of the four seasons created by God was
winter, and that he made it cold and humid; that he next created spring, which he
made hot and humid, then summer, which he made hot and dry, and finally autumn,
which he made cold and dry. For our contemporaries, the first season is spring,
which begins at the moment when the Sun leaves the constellation of the Whale. The
ancients did not agree on the initial season. Some held for spring and chose it to
begin the year; others made it start from the summer solstice, others from the
autumn equinox, others finally from the winter solstice. When the Sun arrives at
the initial point of the Ram, the day is equal to the night, the weather is in
equilibrium: winter gone, spring arrives softening the air, the zephyr blows, the
ice melts, the valleys are furrowed with streams [...]

[PDF p. 52]

... the rivers swell (except in Egypt), the grasses grow, the harvests rise, the
plants increase, the flowers begin to bud, the trees clothe themselves in leaves,
the buds half-open, the surface of the earth turns green, the cattle give birth,
the udders swell, the earth adorns itself with its most brilliant ornaments, as a
young girl adorns herself for those who look at her. God! what an admirable breast
nourished the poet el-Hafiz Gemal-ed-din Youssef ben Ahmed el-Ya'mouri, who said:

    Breathe the air of spring, for it
        is the best zephyr and the most beneficent.
    Its breath nourishes bodies, like
        a spirit enclosed in a transparent substance.

Ibn Qotaïbah says: "As for spring, people declare that it is the season following
winter, and that with it appear the buds and the flowers; they know no other
spring. The Arabs, however, do not agree on this. Some claim that spring is the
season when the fruits ripen (autumn) and that winter comes after it, summer coming
after winter -- this is the season commonly called spring -- and finally comes the
season of great heat that others call summer. Others call 'first spring' the
temperate season when the fruits ripen (that is, autumn) and 'second spring' the
season that follows winter and in which the buds and flowers appear. But all agree
in saying that spring is autumn." -- When the Sun arrives at the end of the Twins
and the beginning of the Crab, the day is at its maximum and the night at its
minimum. Then the days begin to decrease while the nights increase. Spring ends,
one enters the season of summer: the heat becomes stronger, the air is burning, the
simooms blow, the waters fall (except in Egypt), the grasses dry up, the grains are
ready, the harvest is made, the fruits are ripe, the cattle grow fat, bodies become
more vigorous, the udders of the animals swell, the earth appears like a bride. --
When the Sun reaches the end of the Ear and the beginning of the Balance, the night
is equal to the day for the second time, and the night begins to gain on the day,
which decreases. Summer is past, one enters the season of autumn:

[PDF p. 53]

the air becomes cooler, the wind blows, the weather changes, the rivers run dry, the
springs are exhausted, the leaves of the trees yellow, the fruits fall, the
threshing-floors are busy, the grains are stored, the grasses gathered, the soil
becomes dusty (except in Egypt), the animals grow lean, the insects die, the
reptiles burrow, the birds and beasts migrate toward warmer countries, men lay up
provisions for winter. The world resembles a woman of mature age whose youth has
fled. And what an admirable poet is the imam Az ed-din Abou-l-Hosan Ahmed ben Ali
ben Mo'aqqal el-Azdi el-Mohabbi el-Homsi, who expressed himself thus:

    Admirable is the season of autumn, by which one enjoys
        the freshness of the air; it brings us marvels,
    covering the earth with the gold of its leaves --
        and yet it is the earth that usually gives gold.

The same said again:

    Admirable is the season of autumn, season
        of delicate flanks and limpid.
    The water escapes from a resigned heart,
        and the tears flow on the face of the lover.
    The coldness of the first, the pallor of the second,
        are sweet -- the one to him who tastes, the other to him who loves.

And:

    Come is the season of autumn with all sorts of sweetnesses
        and a beauty that enchants the heart and the eyes.
    It shows us the foliage yellowing and gold-colored,
        the water more limpid, white as silver;
    it heaps upon us every benefit
        and grants us every favor.

Another, an adversary of autumn, said:

    Take your heavy garments in autumn, for
        it is dangerous and its breath is harmful;
    it penetrates bodies, like life;
        like a friend -- but of a friend one must beware.

[PDF p. 54]

Another said:

    O you who incriminate the season of autumn, you are far
        from being its equal, in blaming this season.
    There is nothing sweeter to me than it:
        if it makes the boughs leave off their shirt,
    it spreads its garments beneath them.
        Admire then its compassion and the excess of its pity.
    And the most delicious hours of intimacy are those when the moment of parting
        arrives, and when this season draws near.

When the Sun arrives at the end of the sign of the Bow and the beginning of the sign
of the Capricorn, the night is at its maximum and the day at its minimum: the day
begins to increase while the night decreases. Autumn is past, one enters the season
of winter. The cold becomes more severe, the air is sharper, the leaves of the trees
fall, most of the plants die, the animals sink beneath the earth, bodies become
weaker, the surface of the earth strips itself of its ornaments, the clouds gather,
the dew increases, the atmosphere darkens, the soil is laid bare (except in Egypt),
men can no longer go about their labors, the world becomes like an old woman whose
death is near. When the Sun reaches the end of the Whale and the beginning of the
Ram, the weather becomes again what it was the preceding year, and so on. Thus it
was ordered by the Most High, the Almighty, and decreed by the Omniscient. There is
no other God but him!

Ptolemy compared spring to childhood, summer to youth, autumn to mature age, and
winter to old age. -- It is the movements of the Sun and its passage through the
twelve constellations indicated above that regulate the periods of the year and
divide the day into day and night, and these latter into hours. The movements of the
Moon in these same constellations determine the months and the lunar year. The Moon
traverses the twelve constellations and makes the complete circuit of the sky in 28
days and a fraction, and sojourns in each constellation for about 2 1/3 days,
remaining in each of the 28 lunar mansions 1 day and 1 night. It appears at its
rising in the west, after the disappearance of the disk of the Sun, and its light
increases each night by a half-seventh until its light is complete, which happens on
the

[PDF p. 55]

14th night from its appearance. From the 15th night it decreases, and its light
diminishes each night by a half-seventh, as it had increased, until its light reaches
its minimum on the 28th night of its appearance. And during the time elapsed from its
separation from the Sun and its rising in the west until its conjunction with it, it
crosses 28 mansions, which are: the Crab, the Little Belly (e, d, ? of the Ram), the
Pleiades, Aldebaran, the Little Circle (l of Orion), the Brand-Mark (g and n of the
Twins), the Arm (a and b of the Twins), the Thorax (e of the Crab), the Point (k of
the Crab and l of the Lion), the Forehead (z, g, e and o of the Lion), the Mane (th
and o of the Lion), the Coils (b of the Lion), the Howler, the Support (a of the Ear),
the Strands of Hair, the Two Claws (a and b of the Balance), the Crown (b, d, p of the
Scorpion), the Heart (Antares), the Tail (l and u of the Scorpion), the Ostriches (g,
d, e, e, s, t of the Archer), the City (starless part of the Archer), the Fortune of
the Combatant (a and b of the Capricorn), the Voracious Fortune (k, n, e of the
Water-Carrier), the Fortune of Fortunes (b and j of the Water-Carrier), the Fortune of
the Tents (g, z, ch and e of the Water-Carrier), the Anterior Spout (a and b of
Pegasus), the Posterior Spout (a of Andromeda and g of Pegasus), and the Belly of the
Fish (b of Andromeda). The reckoning relating to all this is reported in the special
works, but what we have said suffices. God knows all, and you know nothing.
[Footnote: the translation of the names of the lunar mansions and their identification
are drawn from the Memoire sur les instruments astronomiques des Arabes, by
L.-Am. Sedillot, published in the Memoires presented by various scholars to the Royal
Academy of Inscriptions and Belles-Lettres, 1st series, vol. I, Paris, 1844.]

[PDF p. 56]

CHAPTER II
OF THE FORM OF THE EARTH AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF ITS CLIMES

Now that, from what has just been said of the Universe, the man to whom God has
allotted intelligence can understand how the movement that produces day and night is
brought about, and how these two form the months and the years, we can speak of the
Earth.

The points of orientation are six in number: the east, which is the place where the
Sun, the Moon, and all the stars rise at the different points of the horizon; the
west, which is the side where these bodies set; the north, which is the place where
the Capricorn and the two Calves (b and g of the Little Bear) move; the south, which
is the side where Canopus moves; the zenith, which is above, in the direction of the
sky; and the nadir, below, in the direction of the center of the Earth.

The Earth is a body round like a sphere; some, however, claim that it is not
spherical. It is placed in the air with its whole array of mountains and seas, of
inhabited countries and desert expanses. It is enveloped by the air on all sides, like
the yolk inside the egg; it is situated at equal distance from all the points of the
sky. The lower point of the Earth is in reality determined by its thickness, from the
surface to the center, wherever one may be, the general opinion being that the Earth
is like a sphere placed in the middle of the air and similar to the yolk of the egg in
the shell, the Earth occupying the middle and being at equal distance from all the
points of the sky.

"Beneath the Earth," asserts Hecham ben el-Hakam, "is a body endowed with the property
of rising; it is this body that prevents the Earth from falling; as for itself, it
needs no support, since it never tends to fall but on the contrary to rise." The same
writer says also: "God established the Earth without support." According to Democritus,
the Earth rests on water, and this water is so tightly pressed beneath the Earth that
it finds no outlet by which it might escape.

[PDF p. 57]

-- According to another, the Earth is placed at the center (of the Universe), at equal
distance from all the points of the sky, which attracts it from all sides; that is why
the Earth inclines neither toward one side nor the other, for the force of attraction
is everywhere equal.

It is the same phenomenon as that of the lodestone attracting iron; by its nature, the
sky is the magnet of the Earth and attracts it, but the Earth maintains itself at the
center because of the rapidity of the movement of the sky, which from all sides pushes
the Earth back toward the center. If one puts dust in a bottle and spins it sharply,
the dust will remain at the center of the vessel. Mohammed ben Ahmed el-Khouarezmi says
that the Earth is situated at the center of the sky -- that is, at the bottom of the
sky in reality; that it is round and full of irregularities at the surface, because of
the mountains that jut out and the valleys that lie deep; these irregularities,
moreover, do not prevent it from being round, if one takes account of its whole, for
the height of the mountains -- and I speak of the highest -- is nothing in comparison
with the circumference of the Earth. If, for example, on a ball one or two cubits in
diameter there is some protrusion or some depression, these accidents will not prevent
that ball from being spherical. If, by misfortune, the water surrounded it on all
sides, so as to drown everything and no protrusion were seen anymore, it would be the
end of the special properties enjoyed by minerals, plants, and animate beings (?). Let
us therefore give glory to Him whose mysterious decisions no one but he can penetrate.

The outer surface of the Earth, bathed by the air on all sides, occupies the upper
part; the air holds itself above it, envelops it, and attracts it from all sides. Above
the air are the firmaments of which we spoke above, one above the other up to the ninth
firmament, which is the highest of all and forms the limit of the created Universe.
Opinions are divided on what is beyond: some claim it is the void, others that it is the
plenum, others that it is neither plenum nor void. -- At whatever point of the Earth a
man stands upright, his head is always directed toward the sky and his feet toward the
center of the Earth; he sees continually one half of the sky, while the other half
remains constantly hidden from him by the curvature of the Earth, and [...]

[PDF p. 58]

... however far he moves from one point to another, he always sees of the sky a part
equal to that which is hidden from him.

The Earth is immersed in water like a grape floating on a liquid; about half of it is
visible, while the other half remains plunged in the water. The visible portion of the
Earth is divided into two parts and, as it were, cut by a line parallel to the
equinoctial line and passing below that line. All the countries situated on this line
are without latitude; for them the two poles remain indeterminate and are situated, for
these countries, at the two extremities of the circle of the horizon. Any country
situated off this line on the north side, by the value of one degree, sees the north
pole -- that is, the point of revolution of the Capricorn -- rise by one degree for its
inhabitants, and the south pole, point of revolution of Canopus, lower by one degree,
and so on. Likewise for the south side, it is the south pole that rises and the north
pole that lowers. It is by this that the latitude of a place has been determined. The
latitude of a place, in effect, is the inclination of the equinoctial circle relative
to the zenith of the people of that place and the elevation of the pole at their
horizon; in other words, the latitude of a place is expressed by the difference between
the zenith of the people of that place and the zenith of the people who have no
latitude. -- The visible part of the Earth situated south of the equator is
uninhabited; the other part, north of the equator, represents the inhabited quarter of
the Earth, that is, the peopled part of the Earth.

The equatorial line does not exist in reality; it is a hypothesis of our mind, an
imaginary line that goes from east to west below the circle of revolution of the
initial point of the Ram; it was so named because in the localities it crosses, the
nights are equal to the day, without excess or diminution of one over the other,
throughout the whole course of the year. Of this line, the two points that touch the
horizon: the one is directed on the circle of revolution of Canopus in the south, the
other on the circle of revolution of the Capricorn in the north.

The inhabited Earth counts, from east to west, 180 degrees, and from north to south --
that is, from Khat-Arin (the equator) to Banat-Na'ach (the Daughters of the Bier, the
two Bears), 48 degrees representing twice the value of the inclination of the Sun, and
beyond Khat-Arin 16 degrees; the extent of the inhabited Earth is therefore (from north
to south)
   ---
   [Footnote: the equator. Cf. Reinaud, Geographie d'Aboulfeda (Paris, 1848), vol. I,
pp. ccxl ff.]

[PDF p. 59]

about 70 degrees, which is due to the regularity of the Sun's march and its passage,
twice a year, into the regions situated beyond the Ram and the Balance. The extreme
north and the extreme south are touched by the Sun only once a year; but, as the
culminating point of the Sun is reached by that body twice in the northern hemisphere,
it is in this hemisphere that the inhabited part of the Earth is found, thanks to the
elevation of the Sun, too far off to harm the inhabitants. The contrary taking place in
the southern hemisphere, the Earth is not inhabited there. [Footnote: in contradiction
with what is said further on, p. 34.]

There is no agreement on the extent of the Earth. According to some, it is 500 years'
march, of which one third is inhabited, a second third desert, and the last third
occupied by the seas. According to others, the inhabited part of the Earth is 120
years' march: 90 for Gog and Magog, 12 for the land of the Negroes, 8 for Roum
(Byzantium), 3 for the Arabs, and 7 for all the other peoples. It is said moreover that
the world is divided into 7 parts, of which 6 are for Gog and Magog and 1 for all the
rest of mankind; that the Earth is 500 years' march, of which 300 for the seas, 100 for
the desert regions, and 100 for the inhabited lands; that the extent of the earth is
24,000 parasangs, of which 12,000 for the land of the Negroes, 8,000 for Roum, 3,000
for the Persians, and 1,000 for the Arabs. According to Ouahb ben Mounabbeh, the
inhabited part of the Earth would be, in comparison with the uninhabited part, like a
tent in the desert. Ardechir ben Babek says that the Earth comprises four parts, of
which one belongs to the Turks, another to the Arabs, the third to Persia, and the
last to the Negroes. The climes are 7 in number, the cardinal points 4; there are 45
regions, 10,000 towns, and 256,000 villages; the towns and fortresses number 21,600.
In the first clime one counts 3,100 great towns; in the second, 2,713 towns and great
villages; in the third, 3,079 towns and villages; in the fourth, which is that of
Babel, 2,974 towns; in the fifth, 3,006 towns; in the sixth, 3,408 towns; and in the
seventh, 3,300 towns distributed among the islands. El-Khouarezmi says that the
diameter of the Earth is 7,000 parasangs, which represents the half-sixth of the
Earth, including the mountains, the deserts, and the seas; the rest is uninhabited and

[PDF p. 60]

one meets there neither plants nor animals. -- The inhabited portion of the Earth
resembles, it is said, a bird whose head would be represented by China, the right wing
by the Hind and the Sind, the left wing by the land of the Khazars, the breast by
Mecca, Iraq, Syria, and Egypt, and the tail by the West. It is also recounted that the
diameter of the earth is 7,414 miles and its circumference 20,400 miles, including
everything, lands and seas. Abou Zeid Ahmed ben Sahl el-Balkhi says that the length of
the Earth, from the eastern extremity to the western extremity, is about 400 stages,
and its breadth, from the northern limit of the inhabited earth, abode of Gog and
Magog, to the southern limit, abode of the Blacks, 220 stages; that the part stretching
from the desert of Gog and Magog to the ocean surrounding the Earth in the north, as
well as the part going from the desert of the Blacks to the ocean enveloping the Earth
in the south, are uninhabited; that no living being is met there and that their total
extent is 5,000 parasangs. But all this is only words resting on no proof.

The means of knowing the extent of the Earth is the following: by moving from south to
north along the meridian, the equator will be found to the south of our zenith; if then
we advance by the value of one celestial degree -- that is, the 360th part (of the
celestial circle) -- the pole will rise for us by a degree equivalent to the degree of
displacement. We will then know that we have traversed the 360th part of the
circumference of the terrestrial globe corresponding to the same division of the sky;
measuring the distance separating our point of departure from our point of arrival when
the pole rises by one degree, we will find that one celestial degree represents in
reality on the Earth a distance of 56 2/3 miles, or 25 parasangs. And if we multiply the
value of a single degree -- that is, the number of miles we have just indicated -- by
360, we will obtain as result 20,400 miles, which is the length of the terrestrial
circumference; dividing this last number by 3 1/7, we will obtain as quotient 6,440
miles, the length of the terrestrial diameter; multiplying, moreover, this diameter by
the circumference, one will have the total surface of the Earth, which is about
132,600,000 square miles. From this surface one can derive the evaluation of the
inhabited quarter of the Earth, which would be 33,150,000 square miles; the breadth of
the inhabited part of this quarter is equal to the distance separating the circle of
revolution of the Crab from the

[PDF p. 61]

pole -- that is, 55 1/2 degrees -- which represents the sixth of the terrestrial circle.
The inhabited Earth ends at the island of Thule in Britain; it is the last inhabited
point in the north. This sixth makes, in miles, 3,764; if we multiply this sixth, which
represents the breadth of the Earth, by its half, which is its length, the inhabited
Earth will equal the half of the sixth of the Earth. As for the breadth of the
inhabited Earth, it goes always decreasing because of the narrowing of the divisions of
the circles (of latitude). Its value is equal to the fifth of the circle and is about
4,080 miles. In the inhabited quarter of the earth there are seven great seas, each of
which comprises a certain number of islands; one also counts there 15 lakes, some salt,
others not, 200 high mountains, and 240 great rivers. It is divided into seven climes,
which contain 17,000 great towns.

One reads in the book of Orosius: After Julius, surnamed Caesar, had quelled the
sedition and taken the government of the universe, he chose four philosophers -- whose
names Orosius gives -- and prescribed that the four of them divide among themselves the
description of the limits of the world and the enumeration of its seas and its
provinces; to one was assigned the description of the east, to the second that of the
west, to the third that of the north, to the fourth fell the south. Their work was
completed in about thirty years. The total of the seas known in the universe was
twenty-nine, of which eight for the east, eight for the west, eleven for the north, and
two for the south. The number of the principal islands was seventy-one, of which eight
for the east, sixteen for the west, thirty-one for the north, and sixteen for the
south. The great mountains known were thirty-six in number, all high mountains, whose
names they gave in their work; seven of them were in the east, fifteen in the west,
twelve in the north, and two in the south. One counted also sixty-three great regions,
of which seven in the east, twenty-five in the west, nineteen in the north, and twelve
in the south; they likewise gave the names of these regions. The great known regions
[smaller divisions] amounted to two hundred and nine, of which seventy-five in the east,
sixty-six in the west, six in the north, and sixty-two in the south. The great known
rivers throughout the whole earth were fifty-six in number, of which seventeen for the
east, thirteen for the west, nineteen for the north, and seven for the south.

Each of the seven climes is like an outspread carpet whose length would be measured
from east to west, and the breadth from north to south; these climes are

[PDF p. 62]

of different lengths and breadths. The first of these climes has its middle crossed by
the line beneath which the longest days are 13 hours, while the countries found on the
line passing through the middle of the seventh clime have for their longest days days
of 16 hours. The territory stretching beyond the southern limit of the first clime is
composed of sea and desert; as for that found beyond the northern limit of the seventh
clime, it is not known whether it is inhabited or not. The length of each of the seven
climes, from east to west, equals 12 hours of the revolution of the sky; their breadths
differ by a half-hour according to the count of the hours of their longest days. The
longest and broadest of these climes is the first, which has in length, from east to
west, about 3,000 parasangs, and in breadth, from north to south, 150 parasangs. The
smallest, in length and breadth, is the seventh clime, which has, from east to west,
only a length of 1,500 parasangs and a breadth of 70 parasangs, from north to south.
The five other climes are found between the two we have just spoken of; their limits are
imaginary lines, not existing in reality, and invented by the ancient travelers who
traversed the earth, to recognize its exact limits, fix the location of each region,
and survey the roads that furrow it. So much for the inhabited quarter.

As for the three other quarters, they are deserts. The north is situated under the
circle of revolution of the Capricorn: the cold there is severe, the night lasts six
months without interruption -- it is then the season of winter in those regions; during
this time there is no daylight there, the air is charged with an intense darkness, the
water is solid thanks to the extreme rigor of the cold, and one meets there neither
plants nor animals. This region is diametrically opposite to the south, which is the
place where the revolution of Canopus is carried out; there the day is six months,
without night; it is for this region the time of summer; the air there is burning, the
wind torrid, and the intensity of the heat there makes the animals and plants perish;
one can neither cross it nor sojourn there. As for the west, the enveloping ocean
prevents one from going there, so agitated are its waves and so thick the darkness
there; as for the east, very high mountains forbid the passage. That is why all men have
grouped themselves on the inhabited quarter of the earth; and the greater part of the
earth -- that is, the three quarters other than the inhabited quarter -- is known to no
one.

[PDF p. 63]

The entire earth, with all it contains of mountains and seas, is, in comparison with
the universe, only as a point in comparison with the circle. -- The limits of the
climes have been deduced from the hours of the day, because, when the Sun stands at the
initial point of the Ram, the days and nights are equal throughout all the climes; but
if it moves, continuing its course in the Ram, the Bull, and the Twins, the hours of
the day become unequal for all the climes; when it reaches the end of the Twins and the
beginning of the Crab, the length of the day in the middle of the first clime is 13
hours precisely; it is 13 and a half hours in the middle of the second; 14 hours in the
middle of the third; 14 and a half hours in the middle of the fourth; 15 hours in the
middle of the fifth; 15 and a half hours in the middle of the sixth; and 16 hours in
the middle of the seventh, and so on, increasing up to the 90th (degree), where the day
is continual.

The longitude of a place is the distance separating it from the extreme point of the
inhabited Earth in the west, and its latitude is the distance separating it from the
equator. The equator, as we said above, is a line such that all the countries found on
this line have, at all times, the days equal to the nights. All these countries are
without latitude, and all the countries situated at the extreme west are without
longitude. From the extreme west to the extreme east there are 180 degrees; all the
places whose longitude is 90 degrees are at equal distance from the west and the east.
Any place whose longitude is less than 90 degrees is nearer to the west than to the
east, and any place whose longitude is greater than 90 degrees is nearer to the east
than to the west.

The ancients claimed that the terrestrial world was divided into seven parts called
climes. The clime of India depends on Saturn, that of Babel depends on Jupiter; that of
the Turks, on Mars; that of Roum, on the Sun; that of Egypt, on Mercury; and that of
China, on the Moon. Others say that the Ram and Jupiter are allotted to Babel; the
Capricorn and Mercury to India; the Lion and Mars to the Turks; the Balance and the
Sun to Roum; moreover, that the year is divided among twelve constellations, of which
the Ram and its associates belong to the east; the Bull and its associates to the
south; the Twins and their associates to the west; the Crab and its associates to the
north. -- It is also said that, in each clime, there are two great towns corresponding
to the double [...]

[PDF p. 64]

mansions of each planet, except in the clime of the Sun and that of the Moon, these
two latter possessing only a single great town. The towns and fortresses of the seven
climes number 21,600, corresponding to the number of the minutes of the circle of the
sky. Hermes claims that if, instead of the number of minutes, one took that of the
fourths, one would have the total number of men peopling the climes, for each time a
man dies he is replaced by another. It is asserted that the number of great towns and
villages of the first clime, from the point where the Sun rises, is 3,100; that in the
second there are 2,713; in the third 3,079; 2,974 in the fourth, that of Babel; in the
fifth, 3,006; in the sixth 3,508; and in the seventh 3,300, distributed over the
islands.

On the median line of the first clime are situated the countries where the longest day
is 13 hours. For these places the north pole rises above the horizon by 16 2/3 degrees,
which represents the latitude. It extends in breadth as far as the places where the
longest day is 13 1/4 hours and where the pole rises by 20 1/2 degrees, which is the
latitude of those places; its total breadth is 440 miles. It begins at the extremity of
the land of China, crosses it in the southern part, passes to the shores of the Hind,
then to the lands of the Sind, and, crossing the sea, cuts the Arabian peninsula and the
land of Yemen, crosses the sea of Qolzoum, embraces the land of the Abyssinians, cuts
the Nile of Egypt north of Abyssinia, at the town of Dongola in Nubia, and extends over
the land of the west, south of the country of the Berbers, as far as the enveloping
Ocean. In this clime there are twenty mountains, whose height varies from 20 to 1,000
parasangs; one counts there also thirty great rivers whose course, too, varies between
1,000 and 20 parasangs, and fifty great towns. Most of the peoples inhabiting this clime
are of black color. The constellations that govern it are the Ram and the Bow, and it is
placed under the influence of the planet Jupiter. Despite the intensity of the heat, one
meets in this clime an abundance of water and pastures; maize and rice are cultivated
there; but, as there is never a moderate temperature, the vine produces no grapes there
nor the wheat ears. Cattle are very numerous there because of the considerable quantity
of pastures. -- To the east of this clime is the sea, which extends to the 13th degree
beyond the equator; to the west, the Nile and the sea

[PDF p. 65]

of the west. It is from this clime that the Nile of Egypt comes. The east of this clime
is bathed by the eastern sea, which is none other than the sea of India and of Yemen.

In the second clime, the longest day is 13 1/2 hours; the north pole rises there by 24
1/10 degrees, which is the latitude of this point; it extends in length from the limit
of the first clime to the point where the longest day is 13 3/4 hours and where the
elevation of the north pole is 27 1/2 degrees, and this breadth represents a distance of
400 miles. It begins at the lands of the east, crossing China and heading toward the
lands of the Hind and the Sind; then it crosses the Green Sea and the sea of Basra, cuts
the Arabian peninsula in the region of the Negd and of Tehamah; in this clime are
comprised the towns of El-Iamama, El-Bahraïn, Hagar, Mecca, Medina, Et-Taïf, and the
land of the Hedjaz; from there, heading over the sea of Qolzoum, it embraces Upper
Egypt, crosses the Nile, comprises the towns of Qous, Akhmim, Esneh, Antinoe, and
Assouan, extends over the land of the west in the middle of the land of Ifrikiah, and,
passing to the land of the Berbers, ends at the western sea. In this clime there are
seventeen mountains, seventeen great rivers, and four hundred and fifty great towns. The
color of the inhabitants holds the middle between brown and black. Its special
constellation is the Capricorn and its planet Saturn. It is the abode of the nomads,
whose western tribes are the Hadalah, the Sanhagah, the Lamtunah, and the Masoufah, to
whom are attached the nomads of Egypt who inhabit the oases. It is also in this clime
that are comprised the towns of Yahl, Mecca, and Medina, as well as all the land
stretching between the Samaouah of Iraq and the Turkish nomads.

On the median line of the third clime are situated the places where the longest day is
14 hours, and where the pole rises by 30 1/2 1/5 degrees, the latitude of those places;
it extends in breadth from the northern limit of the second clime to the point where the
longest day is 14 1/4 hours, there where the pole rises by 33 degrees, the latitude of
that point; this breadth is 350 miles. It begins in the east, passes north of China and
the lands of India, comprising the town of Kandahar; it embraces the northern Sind, the
lands of Caboul, of Caramania, of Sagestan, as far as the coast of the sea of Basra; the
towns of Istakhar, Sabour, Shiraz, Siraf; extends over the Ahouaz

[PDF p. 66]

and Iraq, the towns of Ouasit, Basra, Bagdad, El-Koufa, El-Ambar, Heit; over Syria as
far as Salamiah, Tyre, Acre, Damascus, Tiberias, Caesarea, Jerusalem, Ascalon, Gaza,
Madian, Qolzoum; over Middle Egypt from north of Antinoe to Fostat-Masr and the shores
of the sea, comprising the Fayoum, Alexandria, Farmah, Tanis, and Damietta; over the
land of Barca as far as Ifrikiah, with Cairouan, and ends at the sea of the west. One
counts in this clime thirty-three high mountains, twenty-two great rivers, and one
hundred and twenty-eight towns. The inhabitants are of brown color. Its constellation is
the Scorpion and its planet Venus. This clime is inhabited without interruption from one
end to the other.

In the middle of the fourth clime are the countries where the longest day is 14 1/2
hours and where the elevation of the north pole -- that is, the latitude -- is 36 1/5
degrees. It extends, in breadth, from the northern limit of the third clime to the point
where the longest day is 14 1/2 1/4 hours, and the latitude 39 1/3 degrees. [Footnote:
the text erroneously reads 29 1/3.] The extent of this clime is 300 miles. It begins in
the east, comprises Tibet and Khorassan, Hagandah, Farghanah, Samarkand, Bokhara, Herat,
Merw, Er-Roud, Sarakhs, Tous, Nisapour, Gourgan, Qoumes, Tabaristan, Qazwin, Deïlem,
Raï, Ispahan, Hamadan, Nehaouend, Dinawa, Mossoul, Nosibeïn, Amad, Ras-el-Aïn,
Shouméisat, Er-Raqqah; crosses Syria; embraces Baies, Moseh, Malatiah, Alep (Aleppo),
Antioch, Tripoli, Es-Sisah, Hamah, Saïda, Tarsus, Amouriat, and Laodicea; cuts the sea
of Syria; extends over the islands of Cyprus and Rhodes; arrives at the land of Tangier,
to end at the sea of the west. In this clime one meets twenty-five high mountains,
twenty-five great rivers, and two hundred and twelve towns; the color of its inhabitants
holds the middle between brown and white; it has for its constellation the Twins and for
its planet Mercury. This clime comprises all the sea of Roum from the west to
Constantinople; it is in this clime that the prophets and apostles appeared and that the
scholars and sages shone; it occupies, indeed, the middle of the climes, three being
situated to its north and three to its south, and it belongs to the domain of the Sun.
After it come, in importance, the third and fifth climes, which are both its neighbors.
As for the other climes, their inhabitants are far inferior in qualities and far less
elevated in virtues, by reason of the deformity of their bodies and the

[PDF p. 67]

wickedness of their nature; such are the Zings and the Abyssinians. Most of the peoples
spread through the first, second, sixth, and seventh climes are Gogs, Magogs, Tatars,
and Saqalibahs (Slavs) or other people of the same kind.

In the middle of the fifth clime are situated the places where the longest day is 15
hours, places where the elevation of the pole -- that is, the latitude -- is 41 1/3
degrees. It extends from the extreme latitude of the fourth clime to the point where the
longest day is 15 1/4 hours, a point whose latitude is 43 degrees. Its extent is 250
miles. It begins in the east, embraces the lands of Gog and Magog, extends north of the
land of Khorassan, embracing Khouarezm, Asbigab, Azerbaijan, Bourda'ah, Sagestan, the
Jordan, and Khalat; passing over the land of Roum, it heads toward Rome the Great and
Spain and ends at the sea of the west. In this clime one counts thirty high mountains,
fifteen great rivers, and two hundred great towns. Most of its inhabitants have white
skin; its constellation is the Water-Carrier and its planet the Moon.

In the middle of the sixth clime are the places where the longest day is 15 1/2 hours,
places where the elevation of the north pole -- that is, the latitude -- is 45 2/5
degrees. It extends from the northern limit of the fifth clime to the point where the
longest day is 15 1/2 1/4 hours, a point whose latitude is 47 1/4 degrees: the extent of
this clime is 210 miles. It begins in the east, crosses the land of the Turks from the
sea of Kheir and of the Tartars to the region of the Khazars, passes north of their
encampments, comprises Allan, El-Sherir, the land of Borgan, Constantinople, and
northern Spain, and ends at the enveloping Ocean. In this clime there are twenty-two
high mountains, thirty-two great rivers, and ninety great towns. Most of its inhabitants
are of a color intermediate between white and blond; its constellation is the Crab and
its planet Mars.

The middle of the seventh clime is occupied by the places where the longest day is 16
hours exactly; in these places the elevation of the north pole -- that is, the latitude
-- is 48 2/3 degrees; this clime extends from the northern limit of the sixth clime to
the points where the longest day is 16 1/4

[PDF p. 68]

hours, points whose latitude is 50 1/2 degrees; its extent is 185 miles. From this it is
easy to see that the space between the southern limit of the first clime and the
northern limit of the seventh is 3 1/2 hours, representing an elevation of the pole of
38 degrees, or in miles 2,140. The seventh clime begins in the east at the land of Gog
and Magog, extends over the region occupied by the Turks, skirts the sea of Gourgan to
the north, cuts the sea of Roum at the land of Gourgan and of the Saqalibah, and extends
as far as the enveloping sea in the west. This clime contains ten high mountains, forty
great rivers, and twenty-two great towns; its inhabitants are of blond color; its
constellation is the Balance and its planet the Sun.

In each of these seven climes, the peoples differ in language and color as well as in
nature, manners, opinions, religion, mind, habits, acts, industry, customs, and worship,
and none of them resembles another. It is the same for the animals, minerals, and
plants, whose form, taste, color, and scent are diverse, by reason of the differences of
the atmosphere, the aspect of the region, the nature of the soil, the sweetness or the
bitterness of the waters -- things that vary according to whether such or such
constellation rises on the horizon of the country, or whether such or such planet passes
to the zenith of such or such point of the earth, sending its rays there, as is very well
explained in the scientific books. Let the sensible man therefore reflect! Let the
intelligent man guide himself by God's decisions regarding his creature, by the laws it
has pleased him to fix, and by the acts it seems good to him to accomplish! There is no
God but him!

It must be said further that the inhabited quarter of the earth, with its various
regions, was divided among seven great peoples, who are: the Chinese, the Indians, the
Blacks, the Berbers, Roum, the Turks, and the Persians. The southeast of the earth is the
Chinese's, the northeast the Turks', the full south the Indians', the full north Roum's,
the southwest the Blacks', the northwest the Berbers'; as for Persia, it occupies the
center and is surrounded by the six other peoples.

[PDF p. 69]

CHAPTER III
OF THE SITUATION OF EGYPT ON THE EARTH AND OF ITS PLACE AMONG THE SEVEN CLIMES

Since God has made easy for us the task of describing the general state of the earth and
of setting out what concerns each of its climes, let us now speak of the position of
Egypt in relation to both.

A part of Egypt belongs to the second clime and the rest to the third. All the upper
part of the Said, with Qous, Akhmim, Esneh, Antinoe, Assouan, is situated in the second
clime; while all the part of Egypt situated north of Antinoe -- that is, the lower Said
from Siout to Fostat-Masr, the Fayoum, Cairo, Alexandria, Farmah, Tanis, Damietta --
belongs to the third clime. [Footnote: there is an error here, Siout being not north of
Antinoe but rather about 20 leagues to the south.] The longitude of the city of
Masr-Fostat and of Cairo -- that is, their distance from the extreme western point of the
inhabited earth -- is 55 degrees; their latitude -- that is, their distance from the
equator -- is 30 degrees; the longest day there is 14 hours, and the maximum elevation of
the Sun in the sky is 83 1/3 1/4 degrees. Fostat-Masr and Cairo have Mecca to the
southeast quarter. The upper Said, being situated to the south of Fostat and several days'
march away, is for this reason directly to the west of Mecca, which is separated from
Egypt by impracticable regions; for to the east of Egypt, beyond the eastern mountain, is
the sea of Qolzoum. To the west extends the western desert, to the south the desert of
Nubia and Abyssinia, to the north the sea of Syria and the sands covering the space
between the sea of Roum and the sea of Qolzoum. Ibn Khordadhabah, in his book entitled The
Regions and the Roads, says that between Masr and Bagdad there are 1,710 miles, or 570
parasangs, or 140-odd post-stages. Between Masr and Syria -- I mean

[PDF p. 70]

Damascus -- there are 365 miles, or 121 2/3 parasangs, or 30-and-a-fraction post-stages.
Ibn Khordadhabah adds that the extent of Abyssinia and of the Soudan is seven years' (of
march), that Egypt is only the sixtieth part of the Soudan, and the Soudan a fraction of
the earth. In the book of Orosius it is said that the lower Said has, to the east,
Palestine, and, to the west, the land of Libya; that Upper Egypt extends in the direction
of the east; that its limits are to the north the Canal of the west, to the south the
Great Sea, to the west Middle Egypt, and to the east the sea of Qolzoum, and that in this
country there are twenty-eight different peoples.
   ---
   [Footnote: this name is written "Ourious" in the Boulaq edition. In a preceding
passage (see above, p. 28) the name of the same author is spelled "Ourosious."]

[PDF p. 71]

CHAPTER IV
LIMITS AND ORIENTATION OF EGYPT

Delimitation is the figuration of the bounded country with all it contains; the limit is
the end of a thing. The limits are more or less extensive according to the thing bounded.
The directions serving to delimit dwellings and localities are four in number: the north,
in the direction of the celestial north pole, recognizable by its constellation, the
Capricorn, and by the Farqadeïn (b and g of the Little Bear); diametrically opposite to
the north is the south, situated on the side of the celestial south pole, to which Canopus
and the stars of the Ship that neighbor it are very close; the third side is the east,
where the Sun rises at the two equinoxes -- that is, at the initial point of the Ram at
the beginning of the spring season, and at the initial point of the Balance at the
beginning of the autumn season. The fourth side is the west, where the Sun sets at the two
equinoxes of which we have just spoken. These four points are fixed in the firmament and
remain invariable despite the changes of the seasons, and it is by them that one delimits
the lands and the dwellings they contain; it is on them that men guide themselves in their
travels, and by them that they determine the direction of their mihrabs. -- The east and
the west are well known; the north and the south, joined to the east and the west, form
the equal sides of a square embracing the sky. The line that joins the two points north
and south is called the meridian and cuts at a right angle the line passing through the
points east and west, which is called the equator. The spaces intercepted by these two
lines are equal.

A man facing the south has constantly behind him the north, to his right the west, and the
east to his left. These four points serve to delimit the countries, the lands, the
houses. However the Egyptians, in their orientation, instead of the term "south," employ
the expression qibli (direction of the qiblah) and say, for example: "the qibli limit
ends at such a place" and not "the

[PDF p. 72]

south limit." Likewise, they say: "the bahari (direction of the sea) limit ends at such a
place," meaning by the word bahari the north direction. These two terms of orientation are
for certain countries a source of error. Thus, for a place situated on the same latitude
as Mecca but on a lesser longitude, the direction of the qiblah will be exactly to the
east; on the contrary, for a place situated on the same latitude as Mecca but on a greater
longitude, the direction of the qiblah will be exactly to the west; hence, if one wishes
to give the delimitation of something, land or house, in these localities, using the four
cardinal points, two of these points will merge into one. Likewise for the expression
bahari, which among the Egyptians is the direction opposite to qibli, so that they express
the orientation of the lands and dwellings situated between these two points by means of
these two terms habitual to them -- which is also at times a source of error, the
direction of the qiblah being for certain countries the same as that of the sea.

This being established, know that the limit of Egypt starts from the sea of Roum, at
Alexandria -- or according to others at Barca -- crosses the mainland, passes behind the
oases, and continues as far as Nubia; there it bends, follows the frontier of Nubia and
the limit of the (district) of Assouan, and, skirting the territory of the Beggahs situated
south of Assouan, reaches the sea of Qolzoum; then, coasting this sea, it passes Qolzoum in
the direction of Sinai and, crossing the desert of Tih of the Beni Israïl, arrives at the
sea of Roum near the land of Gefar, beyond El-Arich and Raphah; finally, returning along
the shore, it follows the sea of Roum as far as Alexandria and ends at the point from
which it started, in the vicinity of Barca.

Abou-s-Salt Omayah ben Abd el-Aziz, in his opuscule on Egypt, says that this country is
situated entirely in the inhabited earth, partly in the second clime, partly in the third,
but in this last for the greater part. Those who have occupied themselves with the annals
and history of Egypt report that its limit extends, in length, from the town of Barca on
the south coast of the sea of Roum to Aïlat on the gulf formed by the sea of Abyssinia, of
the Zings, of India, and of China. This distance represents about forty days'
   ---
   [Footnote: that is, from one longitude to another.]

[PDF p. 73]

march; its breadth is comprised between Assouan and the lands of the High Said situated on
the same latitude along the land of Nubia, and Rosetta and the mouths of the Nile that
empty into the sea in the vicinity of that town. This breadth corresponds to about thirty
days' march.

Egypt is bounded, in its breadth, by two mountains, of which one, situated to the east of
the Nile, bears the name of Moqattam, and the other extends to the west of the river;
between the two flows the Nile. These are two sterile mountains, not very high and very
close together from Assouan to Fostat. From this point, they separate and move gradually
away from each other, the Moqattam heading toward the east and the other mountain toward
the west, the space intercepted by these two mountains going always enlarging. In
consequence, Egypt widens from Fostat to the shore of the sea of Roum, on which are
situated Farma, Tanis, Damietta, Rosetta, and Alexandria. It is at the sea that its
breadth ends -- that is, the distance between its most southerly point and its most
northerly point. In more precise terms, this distance does not reach thirty days but falls
short of it by an inappreciable quantity, for the space between the latitude of Assouan,
the most southerly point of Egypt, and that of Tennis, its most northerly point, is about
nine divisions (of the circle) and a tenth (9 deg 6'). Between its two extreme longitudes
there is, give or take a little, the same distance; it is about 520 miles, representing
twenty days' march; travelers, in average march, divide the route separating these two
points into as many stages, or a little more, because of the sinuosity of the roads and
the absence of direct routes.

According to El-Qoda'i, the name of Egypt is given to all the country stretching from
El-Arich to the confines of Libya and of Maraqia: beyond the land of Maraqia is the
Pentapolis, otherwise called the land of Barca. To go there, starting from El-Arich,
forty nights are needed, the route constantly following the shore of the sea of Roum, the
northern limit of Egypt and the point from which the north wind blows for it in the
direction of the qiblah or nearly so. Having reached the

[PDF p. 74]

extreme limit of the land of Maraqiah, one turns to the left and, facing south, one crosses
the sands and heads toward the qiblah, leaving on the right the sands of Africa and on the
left the land of Egypt, until one has passed the Fayoum and the four oases; this part of
the route followed forms the western limit of Egypt. At the extremity of the land of the
oases, one faces east and marches in the direction of the Nile; after eight stages one
arrives at the river, which one follows by going up the bank; having then reached the
extreme limit of the Muslim lands, which in this region are bounded by Nubia, and crossing
then the Nile, one marches from Assouan toward the east, turning one's back on Assouan and
heading toward Aïdab, a town situated on the sea of the Hedjaz. From Assouan to Aïdab there
are fifteen stages; this is what is called the southern frontier of Egypt and the point
from which the south wind blows for it; crossing the sea at Aïdab, one lands on the
territory of the Hedjaz, at El-Haura, a locality where the land of Egypt begins, and which
is situated on the same latitude as the city of the Prophet. The fraction of sea thus
delimited is the sea of Qolzoum, which penetrates into the land of Egypt, bathing it on the
east, the west, and the north; on the eastern shore of this sea is the territory of
El-Haura, then Tensa, En-Nabq, the districts of Madian and of Aïlat, and beyond this last
country, the waters extend as far as the Moqattam of Egypt (?). To the west, they bathe the
territory stretching from Aïdab to the sea of the Ostriches and to the Moqattam. To the
north, they reach the town of Qolzoum and the mountain of Tor. From Qolzoum to Farmah there
are a day and a night of march; this stretch of land constitutes the barrier separating the
two seas, that of the Hedjaz and that of Roum. All this route forms the eastern limit of
Egypt, from El-Haura to El-Arich; it is the point from which the east wind blows for the
Egyptians. Such are the limits of Egypt -- but all the territories situated beyond the
western frontier were conquered by the Egyptians, as well as all the ports from Barca to
Spain.
   ---
   [Footnote: I suspect the text is faulty here; however, as will be seen further on, the
Moqattam, according to Maqrizi, extends from Cairo into the Arabian peninsula and beyond.
There would be nothing astonishing, in that case, in the sea of Qolzoum bathing the foot of
some spur of this mountain.]

[PDF p. 75]

CHAPTER V
OF THE SEA OF QOLZOUM

The word qolzoum signifies "anguish" and "constriction." This word was given to the sea of
Qolzoum because it is constricted between mountains. Now, Egypt being constricted between
two seas, that of Qolzoum to the east and that of Roum to the north, and the sea of Qolzoum
penetrating into the land of Egypt, as was explained above, it is fitting for our book to
give a description of it.

This sea bears the name of Qolzoum only in the land of Egypt, because, to the east of Egypt
and to the west of this sea, is a town named Qolzoum, destroyed today, as will be explained,
God willing, in the part of this book where we will treat of the villages and the towns. The
name of the town was therefore given to the sea, the word Qolzoum being employed in the
genitive; it is called in Hebrew yom souf. In sum, this sea is only a gulf detached from the
great sea that envelops the earth and is called the Ocean, or again the Sea of Darkness,
because of the thickness of the fogs that rise from it and the powerlessness of the sun to
dissipate them; thus these mists are very dense and the obscurity impenetrable; the waves of
this ocean are enormous and increase its horror still more. Of it one knows only what is
known of a few points of its shore and of some of its nearest islands. Near the western shore
of this sea, from which issues the sea of Roum -- of which, God willing, we will soon speak
-- are the Khaledat islands which, it is said, are six in number, inhabited by a savage
people; to the east, on the side of China, are six other islands, named the Sabali islands,
in which, in the first times of Islam, some Alids fleeing death landed. From this ocean issue
six seas; God meant to speak of the two greatest of them [...]

[PDF p. 76]

... when he said: "He has separated the two seas that touch" (Koran, LV, 19) and: "He
has placed a barrier between the two seas" (Koran, XXVII, 62). One of these seas is to
the east and the other to the west. The eastern sea bears the names of sea of China,
Indian sea, Persian sea, sea of Yemen, sea of Abyssinia, according to the regions it
bathes; that of the west is named the sea of Roum. The sea of India -- that is, the one
that takes its origin in the east -- begins to the east of China, 13 degrees beyond the
equator, and heads toward the west, bathing China, India, then Kanbana and Et-Taïr of
the land of Karman. At the land of Karman it divides into two branches, of which one
bears the name of Persian sea and the other that of sea of Yemen. The latter begins at a
mountainous cape named the Cape of the Skull. From this point it advances toward the
town of Tafar, skirts El-Masgar and the land of Hadramaout as far as Aden and
Bab-el-Mandeb. The total length of the Indian sea (from the beginning to Bab-el-Mandeb)
is 8,000 miles, and its breadth 1,700 miles in some places, but at times its breadth is
less. Arrived at Bab-el-Mandeb, it forms the sea of Qolzoum. The Mandeb is a mountain 12
miles long, and the breadth of the strait is such that a man placed on one of its banks
can make out a man placed on the opposite bank. From Bab-el-Mandeb, this sea heads toward
the north between the two shores of Zebid and El-Heroun as far as Athr, formerly a royal
residence. From there, passing Hala, it arrives at 'Asfan and Anmar, port of the city of
the Prophet; from there it skirts the region facing El-Hagfa, a locality named today
Rabarh, arrives at El-Haura, Madian, Aïlat, Tor, Faran, and the town of Qolzoum. At
Qolzoum it returns toward the south, passes Qoseïr, port of Qouss, then from Qoseïr to
Aïdab, port of the Begahs, and from Aïdab to the land of Zeila, on the coast of
Abyssinia, which serves Berber. The length of this sea is 1,500 miles and its breadth
400 miles, and often less. It is a sea disagreeable to the sight and to the smell. It is
this sea that receives the Tigris and the Euphrates; it bathes the lands of India and
of Yemen, peninsulas that the water surrounds on three sides; it bars the course of the
river Mahran as the sea of Roum obstructs the course of the Nile. In this sea, between
Qolzoum and Aïlat, is a place named Faran, near which rises a mountain that it is very
difficult for ships to avoid, because of the frequency of the shifts of wind and the
violence with which it blows in the channel formed by

[PDF p. 77]

two mountains there; it is a kind of lake, 6 miles wide, named the lake of Garandal; it
is there, it is asserted, that Pharaoh drowned; when the south wind blows it is
impossible for ships to cross this lake. The Garandal is, it is said, the name of a
statue placed there formerly to close the exit from Egypt to those who had incurred the
disgrace of the king or who wished to escape him. When Moses, at the head of the
Israelites, left Egypt heading toward the east, God ordered him to stop facing this
statue. The news of the flight of the Hebrews having reached Pharaoh, he thought that
the statue, according to its habit, would prevent Moses and his people from continuing
their route; he therefore set out, with his armies, in pursuit of Moses and the Hebrews,
hoping to seize the fugitives. God has recounted to us how he drowned. As for the story
of Moses, it will be spoken of, in connection with the church of Dimouah, in the part of
this book that treats of the churches of the Jews.

The sea of Qolzoum contains fifteen islands, of which four are peopled: the island of
Dahlak, the island of Souakin, the island of Na'man, and the island of Samry. This sea
gives birth to two straits, one minuscule, in the land of India, and the other which
separates the Soudan from Yemen and whose breadth, at its narrowest part, is about two
parasangs. The shortest distance from this sea to the sea of Roum, across the
territories of Syria and Egypt, is hardly more than a day's march.

[PDF p. 78]

CHAPTER VI
OF THE SEA OF ROUM

Since several towns of Egypt are situated on the coast of the sea of Roum -- such as
Alexandria, Damietta, Tanis, Farma, El-Arich, and others -- and since Egypt is bathed on
the north by this sea into which the Nile empties, it is well to give some information on
it.

As we have already said, the sea of Roum takes its origin in the west, in the fourth
clime, between Spain and Morocco, and extends as far as Constantinople. It is recounted
that it was Alexander the Great who dug it and brought it from the western ocean.
Formerly, it is said, the peninsula of Spain and the land of the Berbers formed but a
single land inhabited by the Berbers and the Spaniards, who plundered one another. This
lasted until the reign of Alexander the Great, son of Saliqus (Philip), son of Aricos,
son of Douban. The Spaniards begged this prince to establish between them and the Berbers
an arm of the sea that would prevent these two peoples from passing into each other's
land. Alexander therefore dug a ditch 18 miles long and 12 wide; on each side he built
masonry on which a bridge was placed allowing passage. On this bridge guards were posted,
charged with preventing the Berbers from crossing it without permission. Now, the level
of the Ocean being higher than the ceiling of this canal, the water invaded it, covered
the masonry as well as the bridge, flooded a quantity of lands in its passage, and
destroyed a number of countries. The legend adds that the sailors assert that at certain
times, despite a favorable wind, they cannot continue their route, because of the
obstacles they meet, and because the hull of the ships gets caught between the
battlements crowning the parapets of the bridge, or between the two parapets themselves.
Subsequently, the ditch lengthened and

[PDF p. 79]

widened to the point of becoming a sea 18 miles wide. At low tide, it is claimed, one can
still today see the bridge -- but all these sayings seem to me pure fables. For this sea
was known as bathing the coasts of Egypt many centuries before Alexander, whether it was
formed by human hand in primitive times, or whether this human origin is fabulous. In any
case, the era in which Alexander lived is recent compared with the existence of this sea.
And God knows it better than we!

This strait, difficult for navigation, is, moreover, of a frightful horror because of the
agitation of its waves. The sea, having passed this strait, skirts the land of the
Berbers, the north of the far west to the middle of the lands of the setting sun, bathes
Ifrikiah (Tunisia), Barca, Alexandria, the north of the desert of Tih, Palestine, the
coast of Syria; then, making a bend, it heads toward El-Alaïa and Antioch, passes outside
Constantinople, and ends at the enveloping Ocean from which it issued. The length of this
sea is 5,000 miles according to some, 6,000 miles according to others, and its breadth
varies between 700 and 300 miles. One meets there 170 islands inhabited by numerous and
known peoples, but whose description does not enter into the plan of this book. Among
these islands are Sicily, Sourqa, and Crete.

Facing the sea of India, to the west, is a sea starting from the enveloping Ocean, to the
west of the land of the Zings, and ending in the vicinity of the mountain of Qomor; it is
into this sea that empties the Nile crossing Abyssinia, and, at the bottom of this sea,
are the Khaledat islands where the extreme western meridian passes. Opposite the sea of
Syria to the east are the sea of Gergan, which, it is said, rejoins the enveloping Ocean
by passing between high mountains, and the sea of Saqalba, a sea that begins in the west
between the 6th and 7th climes. It is a very vast sea, containing numerous islands, among
others the island of Andalusia; but this last is attached to the continent by a mountain
shaped like an arm, which links Spain to the continent at the height of Barcelona. To
these seas is attached that of Gog and Magog, an immense sea containing marvelous things
whose description does not enter into the scope of this work. The extent of the shore of
the sea of Roum is, it is said, four months' march.

Abou'r-Rihan Mohammed ben Ahmed Albirouni, in his book entitled Delimitation and
Orientation of Dwellings for Determining the Extent of Inhabited Countries, recounts

[PDF p. 80]

that certain kings of Persia, during their domination over Egypt, conceived the idea of
digging the space intercepted by the seas of Qolzoum and of Roum, and of suppressing the
barrier separating them; the first was Shasis, son of king Tarates, then king Darius. But
the enterprise failed, because the level of the sea of Qolzoum is higher than that of
Egypt. In the time of Greek domination, Ptolemy III entrusted the enterprise to
Archimedes, on condition that no harm should result from it; but the Roman emperors had
this canal filled in to prevent their enemies from reaching them. The philosophers who
have occupied themselves with history claim that the space between the territory of
Alexandria and Constantinople was formerly a land planted with sycamores and peopled, but
unhealthy; that the inhabitants were Greeks; that it was Alexander who brought the sea
there, and that since then this land has been under the waters. It is there that dwelt, it
is said, the bird Cycnos -- a bird whose magnificent voice becomes more beautiful as death
approaches: during the last seven days of its life, the voice of this bird is such that no
one can hear it, for the charm of its song captivates the heart of the one who listens to
it, to the point that the latter dies of it; for during these days, full of well-being and
joy and taking no rest, he follows the bird that is going to die. It is recounted that the
inventor of music was a philosopher who wished to hear the voice of the swan at that
precise moment. But fearing that too sudden a hearing would kill him, he stopped his ears
hermetically, then, approaching the animal, reopened them little by little, taking three
days to unstop them completely; he wished by this means to come gradually to hear it, so
as not to be seized abruptly by the beauty of the bird's song and die. This bird was, it
is asserted, destroyed, and there remained no trace either of it or of its young, because
the water submerged it in its nest, along with its brood, during the night, and absolutely
nothing of it remained. It is recounted that a king, wishing to put a philosopher to
death, gave him a poisoned cup to drink and warned him of it. The philosopher at once
showed great joy and lively gladness. "O sage," asked the king, "why is this?" "What
then," answered the philosopher, "am I not worth as much as a swan!"

[PDF p. 81]

CHAPTER VII
OF THE ORIGIN OF THE NAME OF MASR, OF ITS MEANING, AND OF THE DIFFERENT NAMES OF EGYPT

In primitive times, before the flood, Egypt bore, it is said, the name of Gezlah;
subsequently it was called Masr; the scholars do not agree on the reason that caused this
name to be given to Egypt. Some say it comes to it from Masr, son of Mourkabil, son of
Douabil, son of Ariab, son of Adam; that one is the first Masr. Others claim, on the
contrary, that it comes to it from the second Masr, son of Misraïm, son of Ya'rouch the
mighty, son of the first Misraïm; this second Masr gave his name to Masr, son of Bensar,
son of Cham, after the flood. According to others, finally, its name would come to it from
the third Masr, son of Bensar, son of Cham, son of Noah. For some, it is a foreign word
that does not take the nunnation; for others, it is derived from Arabic. Those who plead
in favor of the foreign origin of the name of Masr rely on the accounts collected by the
historians on the arrival in Egypt of Masr, son of Bensar, son of Cham, and on the
division of the soil among his children; hence its name.

Here is what one reads in El-Hassan ben Ahmed el-Hamdani: "Masr, son of Cham, is the same
as Misraïm," and he adds that Bensar, son of Hermes, son of Herdous, is the forefather of
Alexander. He affirms also that Louma, son of Cham, married a daughter of Shouaïl, son of
Yaphet, son of Noah, who gave him as sons Bouqir and Qobt, father of the Copts of Egypt;
this is what made it believed that Masr was son of Cham, while in reality he is the son of
Hermes, son of Herdouch, son of Bitoum, son of Raoua, son of Lithi, of Younnan. It is
from him that Egypt took its name of Masr, which is a Macedonian word (?).

Abou-l-Hassan el-Maçaoudi, in his book on The News of the Times, recounts that, discord
having arisen among the sons of Adam, and the sons of Qabil (Cain), son of Adam, having
set about molesting their brothers, Naqraouch the mighty, son of

[PDF p. 82]

Misraïm, son of Mourkabil, son of Douabil, son of Ariab, son of Adam, set out, with
seventy horsemen all valiant, in search of a corner of land where they could live safe
from the aggressions of their brothers. They continued their march until they had arrived
at the Nile; they skirted the river and, seeing the extent and beauty of the valley, were
marveled and said: "This country is good to inhabit and to cultivate." And they settled
there, peopled it, built there magnificent constructions and admirable edifices, and
Naqraouch founded the city of Masr, to which he gave the name of his father Misraïm.
Naqraouch was powerful and strong, and moreover possessed knowledge. The genies seconded
him in the destruction of his brothers and obeyed him always thereafter. He had learned
some of the sciences formerly taught by Zouamil to Adam, and that is what gave him
superiority over the great ones and the kings who preceded him. When he was master (of
Egypt), he had a city built at the spot where he had pitched his tent; the stones of the
mountains were cut, the lead mines worked, and a city was built to which was given the
name of Amsous, and where towers were raised, each a hundred cubits high; then, the
country becoming fertile and peopled, he had towns and villages built and occupied all the
points of the country that seemed to him good to occupy. Then the Nile was dug to bring
the water of the river toward all the inhabited points. Before this time, there was no
regularity in the course of the river; it went at random, spread over the lands, and the
water returned toward Nubia; it was embanked, canals were derived from it that watered
most of the towns that had been founded. A special canal passed by the city of Amsous,
which it crossed through its middle.

After the flood, Egypt took the name of Masr, son of Bensar, son of Cham, son of Noah,
because the priest Qlimoun, having left Egypt, had taken refuge with Noah and had adopted
his religion -- he, his family, his son, and his disciples -- and because, having gone up
with Noah into the ark, his daughter married Bensar, son of Cham, son of Noah. On leaving
the ark, Noah divided the earth among his children. Now the daughter of Qlimoun had given
Bensar a son named Misraïm, and Qlimoun said to Noah: "O prophet of God, send my son with
me, that I may take him to my country, show him my treasures, and teach him the sciences
and the secrets he must know." And he took him with him, as well as all the people of his
house. He was then a young boy accustomed to comfort. On approaching

[PDF p. 83]

Egypt, Qlimoun had a shelter built for him of tree branches covered with grasses of the
land. Later a city was raised there that was named Darsan -- that is, "gate of paradise."
The land was cultivated, trees and gardens were planted from Darsan to the sea, and in
this space there were nothing but fields, gardens, and dwellings. The companions of
Misraïm were vigorous; they cut the rocks, raised towers and edifices, and led the
happiest life. It is recounted that the Egyptians chose for their king Misraïm, son of
Bensar, in the time of Talegh, son of Amer, son of Shamekh, son of Arphaxad, son of Sem,
son of Noah; he reigned in Masr, a powerful city on the Nile to which he had given his
name. Misraïm, it is said, planted with his own hand trees whose fruits were prodigious,
so much so that an orange cut in two formed the load of a camel and the cucumbers reached
the length of fourteen spans. Misraïm is also, it is said, the first to have built boats
on the Nile, and the first of these boats was 300 cubits long by 100 cubits wide.
According to tradition, Misraïm married a daughter of the caste of priests, by whom he had
a son named Qobtim. The latter, at the age of seventy, married a woman by whom he had four
sons: Qobtim, Ashmoun, Atrib, and Sa; then they multiplied and spread over the land, which
was blessed for them. It is recounted that on their arrival they were thirty men, and that
a city was built to which was given the name of Nafat, a word that in their language means
"thirty"; it is the same as Memphis. [Footnote: there must be a printing error; the name
of the city should have been "Nisafat," the word "thirty" being rendered in Egyptian.] The
companions of the priest Qlimoun discovered the treasures of Egypt and unveiled its
sciences: they worked the mines, learned the sciences of talismans and alchemy, built
towns elsewhere than on the river -- among others Raqoudat, where Alexandria later rose.
Near death, Misraïm designated as his successor his son Qobtim. He had already divided the
land among his sons, leaving to Qobtim the territory between Qouft and Assouan; to Ashmoun
the part stretching from Ashmoun to Memphis; to Atrib the whole Haouf; and to Sa the space
stretching from the region of Sa northward to Barca. Qobtim therefore said to his brother:
"Take for your share, from Barca to the setting sun"; and the latter became the possessor
of Africa and

[PDF p. 84]

the master of the peoples with the cleft lip. Qobtim ordered each of his sons to build
himself a city in the place assigned to him; moreover, he prescribed that they should, after
his death, dig him an underground chamber, pave it with white marble, deposit his body
there, bury there all the gold and gems that were in his treasures, and engrave there the
name of God to prevent his body from being carried off. They therefore dug him an
underground chamber 150 cubits long, placed in the middle a pedestal plated with leaves of
gold, and traced four doors each guarded by a statue of gold, crowned with a crown set with
gems and seated on a throne of gold inlaid with emeralds; on the chest of each statue were
engraved verses to protect the corpse. Then they deposited the body of Misraïm in a marble
coffin plated with gold, and they engraved this inscription on the pedestal: "Misraïm, son
of Bensar, son of Cham, son of Noah, died seven hundred years after the flood. He never
worshiped the idols; thus he was never old, nor sick, nor sorrowful, nor morose; his
strength resided in the name of God Most High. None will approach him but a king, issued
from seven kings faithful to the religion of the God of the faiths, who will have believed
in the mission of the one who, at the end of time, will come with the Book and invite men
to convert to the true faith." And they placed near him, on this pedestal, a thousand cut
emeralds, a thousand statuettes of precious stones, a thousand vessels filled with
magnificent pearls, and a quantity of divine works, perfumes, marvelous talismans, and
ingots of gold; then they covered the whole with rocks, spread sand over it between two
mountains, and his son Qobtim took the reins of the kingdom.

Abou Mohammed Abd el-Melek ben Hecham, in his book of the Precious Gifts, says that Abd
Shams was son of Yachkhob, son of Ya'rab, son of Qahtan, son of Houd, brother of Ad, son
of Amer, son of Shalekh, son of Arphaxad, son of Sem, son of Noah; that the true name of
this Abd Shams was Amer, but that he was called Abd Shams because he was the first man to
worship the sun; he was also named Saba, for he is the first who gave himself over to
pillage. That one is Saba the Ancient, father of Himyar and of Kahlan, who reigned after
his father Yachkhob over the land of Yemen, gathered the Beni Qahtan and the Beni Houd,
and set out with them on an expedition. With them he arrived in the land of Babel,
conquered it, and killed all that opposed his passage; from there he reached Armenia,
seized the land of the descendants of Yaphet, son of Noah, and wished

[PDF p. 85]

next to go to Syria and Mesopotamia. As he was told: "For that you must retrace your
steps," he had a bridge built over the sea, by means of which he was able to reach Syria,
and seized that country as far as Ed-Darb. In that time there were no inhabitants beyond
Ed-Darb; he therefore formed the design of conquering the land of the Arabs, stopped at
the edge of the Nile, and gathered his council: "I have resolved," he said, "to build a
city in the isthmus separating the two seas of Roum and of Qolzoum, a city that will
serve as a separation between the East and the West." "O king," answered the councilors,
"the design is excellent." And he built a city that he named Masr; he established as
governor of it his son Babilioun, then continued his route toward the land of the
descendants of Cham, son of Noah, who inhabit the desert as far as Yamouniat and
Ya'mouniat of the Copts. He attacked the confederation of these tribes, carried off their
children, as he had done in the East; that is why he was given the name of Saba. Then he
returned to Egypt, crossed it to go to Syria and from there reach the Hedjaz. At the
moment of departing, he gave these counsels to his son Babilioun:

    Here is what must be said to Babilioun, and it is a wise word:
        Since you have taken the reins of the East and the West, be a good prince
    toward the sons of Cham; take in all things the just mean;
        and if they turn one day from the truth, draw near to them.
    If, in their words, and through obedience, they show themselves just,
        desiring what is just and equitable, be just also.
    In critical moments do not let your designs appear,
        one would take boldness from it against you; act with decision.
    Do not levy the tax unjustly,
        and, when it comes in, do not keep it for yourself, but be generous.
    Correct with the sword those who hate you, for,
        seeing decision in you, the hateful one will make himself agreeable.
    Be gentle and firm toward the man of elevated sentiments;
        do not show yourself violent toward him, but agreeable.
    For those who implore you, be the refuge and the clemency,
        for it is the generous man who is invoked.
    Beware of short expeditions; for,
        in all circumstances, God knows how to dispense wealth.

Then, having returned to Yemen, he built the dam of Mareb, intended to close the reservoir
into which empty seventy rivers that water a space three months long by as much in width,
and died at the age of five hundred years. After [...]

[PDF p. 86]

him reigned his son Himyar, son of Saba. The sons of Cham revolted against Babilioun and
attempted to ravage Egypt. Babilioun called to his aid his brother Himyar, who went to
Egypt, marched as far as the lands of the West, and remained there a hundred years,
building towns and raising edifices. Babilioun, son of Saba, died at Masr and was replaced
by his son Amri'l-Qaïs, son of Babilioun. Then Himyar, son of Saba, died at the age of
four hundred and forty-four years, after four hundred years of reign. After him reigned
Ouaïl, son of Himyar, who, after his death, was replaced by his son Saksak, son of Ouaïl.
It is that one who was surnamed Mouqa'qa' el-Hamd (the shaker of glory). Discord having
arisen in the kingdom of Himyar, Saksak fought the rebels, marched as far as Syria, met,
at Ramleh, 'Amer, son of Amri'l-Qaïs, son of Babilioun, son of Saba, who had taken the
government after the death of his father, and went to meet him with presents. He confirmed
him in Egypt, where he remained until the arrival of Abraham, the Beloved of God, to whom
he made a present of Hagar. [Footnote: this entire passage, up to the words "Abou-l-Qassem
... says," is missing from most of the manuscripts. Perhaps it was interpolated by one of
the readers of the work. (Note of the Boulaq edition.)]

Abou-l-Qassem Abd er-Rahman ben Abd Allah ben Abd el-Hakem, in his book of the Conquests
and Chronicles of Egypt, says, on the authority of Abd Allah ben Abbas: Noah had four
children -- Sem, Cham, Japhet, and Yokhtan -- and he supplicated God, asking him to grant
his gifts to his sons and their posterity, which would multiply by the favor of God and
his blessing. God consented to it. Then Noah called his children, who were asleep, for it
was daybreak. He began with Sem, who answered him by running up and who called his children
also, among whom Arphaxad alone answered; the two went to Noah, who, placing his right hand
on Sem and his left on Arphaxad, son of Sem, asked God to grant Sem the most magnificent
of his blessings and to choose the kings and prophets from among the descendants of
Arphaxad. -- Then Noah called Cham, turning right and left, but Cham did not answer and did
not run up to his father, neither he nor any of his children. Then Noah asked God to make
the descendants of Cham wretched and to make them the servants of the descendants of Sem.
Now Masr, son of Bensar, son of Cham, was sleeping near the latter and, having heard the
curse pronounced by Noah on

[PDF p. 87]

his grandfather and his line, rose, ran toward Noah, and said to him: "O my forefather, if
my grandfather, nor any other of his children, has answered you, I at least run up;
address therefore to God one of your prayers for me." Noah, much rejoiced, placed his hand
on the head of Masr and said: "O my God, this one has answered my call; bless him as well
as his posterity, and give him for an abode the blessed land, mother of regions and refuge
of the servants of God, the land whose river is the most admirable of the rivers of the
world. Put in it the best of your blessings; make it humble for this child and his
posterity; submit it to them, and let them be its powerful masters." -- And he called his
son Yaphet (who did not answer), nor any of his children. Then Noah implored God against
them, asking that he make them the worst of creatures. -- And Sem lived blessed until his
death, as did Arphaxad his son; and royalty, beloved of God, and prophecy and blessing
remained in the house of Arphaxad, son of Sem.

The eldest of the children of Cham was Chanaan, the one whose mother was pregnant at the
time of the avenging cataclysm (the flood). Noah having cursed him, he became black; he
had as his share strength, violence, and harshness; it is he who was the father of the
Blacks and the Abyssinians. The second son of Cham was Qouch, father of the inhabitants of
India and the Sind; the third Phut, son of Cham, ancestor of the Berbers; and the youngest
Bensar, son of Cham, stock of all the Copts. Bensar, son of Cham, had in turn four sons:
the eldest Masr, son of Bensar, for whom Noah made the prayer we have reported; then Farek,
son of Bensar; then Mah, son of Bensar; and finally Yah, son of Bensar. The children of
Masr were also, it is said, four in number: Qoft, son of Masr, Ashmoun, son of Masr, Atrib,
son of Masr, and Sa, son of Masr. -- According to Ibn Lahia and Abd Allah ben Khaled, the
first to inhabit Egypt was Bensar, son of Cham, son of Noah, who went there after God had
made his people perish by the flood. The first city built in Egypt was Memphis, in which
dwelt Bensar and his family, thirty persons in number; four of them grew up and married --
these were the four sons of Bensar, Masr, Farek, Yah, and Mah, of whom the eldest was Masr,
by whom the city of Masr was built. Previously the Egyptians inhabited the flanks of the
Moqattam, where they had cut for themselves numerous shelters. Noah had asked God to make
Masr dwell in the excellent and blessed land, mother of nations and

[PDF p. 88]

refuge of the servants of God, whose river is the most admirable of the rivers of the
earth, and to spread there for him the best of his blessings, to make this land humble for
him and his descendants, to submit it to them, and to make them its powerful masters. Masr
having questioned Noah about this land, Noah described it to him and gave him some
information about it.

Masr, son of Bensar, was, it is said, with Noah in the ark when the latter made this prayer
for him. Bensar was already old and weak; he sent his children, Masr and all his brothers,
to Egypt, where they stopped and to which they gave the name of Masr. When Bensar and his
sons were solidly installed in Egypt, Farek, Yah, and Mah, sons of Bensar, said to their
brother Masr: "We know that you are our eldest and the best among us. Now this land, in
which your forefather Noah made you dwell, we find too narrow for you (and they spoke thus
because the children of Masr and their descendants had multiplied). We therefore ask of you
the blessing that our forefather Noah put in you, so that this blessing may follow us into
the land where we will stop and where we will dwell, and that it may remain with us and
with our children." "Your aim is wise," said Masr; "but stay in a country near mine and do
not move far from me. My land has an extent of a month's march in every direction; I will
therefore keep it for myself, my children, and their posterity." And Masr, son of Bensar,
kept for himself the space between the region of the two Trees, near El-Arich, and Assouan
in length, and between Barca and Aïlat in breadth. Farek attributed to himself the space
between Barca and Ifrikiah; his descendants were the Africans and the country took the name
of Ifrikiah; the extent of this territory is a month's march. -- Mah had for his share the
space stretching from the region of the two Trees, limit of Egypt, to Mesopotamia, over a
length of a month's march; he is the father of the Copts of Syria. Finally, Yah took for
himself all the part beyond Mesopotamia, from the sea to the East, over an extent of a
month's march. He is the stock of the Copts of Iraq. Bensar, son of Cham, died and was
buried at the spot where later rose the convent of Amba-Hermes, to the west of the
Pyramids: it is the first place where anyone was buried in Egypt. The children of Masr
multiplied; the first were Qoft, Atrib, Ashmoun, and Sa. The Copts are the descendants of
this Masr. It is said that Qoft was the brother of the Qoft whom they call in their
language Qoftim, Qobtim, and Misraïm.

[PDF p. 89]

Bensar, son of Cham, therefore died, after having designated as his successor Masr and
having assigned to each of Masr's brothers a part of the land equal in extent to Egypt,
which Masr had reserved for himself and his children. And when the children of Masr and the
children of his children had multiplied, he divided Egypt among each of his sons and
assigned them a territory for themselves and their descendants; the Nile was divided
likewise. His son Qobt had for his lot the city of Qoft, where he resided and to which he
gave his name, as well as the territory stretching south of Qoft to Assouan, and north to
Ashmoun, and all the towns comprised in this space, to the east and west (of the Nile). To
Ashmoun were attributed the country and the towns from Ashmoun to Memphis, east and west;
Ashmoun inhabited the city of Ashmoun, to which he gave his name. Atrib had as his share
the country situated between Memphis and Sa (Saïs) and inhabited Atribis, which took his
name. Sa was put in possession of the land between Sa and the sea, and inhabited the city
of Sa, to which he gave his own name. Thus Egypt was divided into four parts, of which two
comprised Upper Egypt and two Lower Egypt.

According to El-Bakhri, Masr is a feminine word. It is said in the Koran: "Am I not the
master of Masr?" (Koran, XLIII, 50) and: "Enter into Masr" (Koran, XII, 100). 'Amer ben
Abou Ouathilat el-Kinani said to Moawiah: "As for Amr ben el-As, you have given him Masr as
his share"; and as for the verse: "Enter into a Masr" (Koran, XII, 100), God, in this
passage, meant by Masr any town whatever. The reading of Selim el-'Amach is: "Enter into
Masr," saying that this Masr is the country over which Selim ben Ali governed; thus he does
not give it the nunnation. El-Qoda'i reports that Bensar, son of Cham, having become old
and weak, his son Masr took him, as well as all his brothers, to Egypt, where they stopped,
and which from this took the name of Masr. It is, he adds, a word that does not take the
nunnation, for it is a masculine substantive by which this city was designated. In this
way, it unites the two qualities of feminine and proper noun, which prevents it from taking
the nunnation. [Footnote: the word masr is a common noun of the masculine gender; but,
designating a particular city, it becomes feminine and a proper noun.] One designates by
the name of Masr all the great towns where travelers

[PDF p. 90]

stop; if it is one of these towns you wish to designate, then the word Masr takes the
nunnation, for one of the two reasons opposing this nunnation no longer exists, the word no
longer being a proper noun. In the verse of the Koran where God says to Moses: "Go down into
Masr, for you will find there what you desire" (Koran, II, 58), the word Masr takes the
nunnation according to all the readings, except those of El-Hassan and El-Amach. The
partisans of the nunnation rely on two reasons: (1) God, they affirm, meant to say: Go down
into a town, because the Israelites were then in the desert of Tih; (2) even if God had
meant to designate the town of Masr, the nunnation would be necessary because it is a
masculine word, derived from a masculine noun, which does not prevent the nunnation. Their
adversaries understand, in this passage, the town of Masr, and refer to the passage relating
to Joseph, where it is said: "Enter in safety into Masr, God willing!" (Koran, XII, 100) and
the word of Pharaoh: "Am I not the master of Masr?" (Koran, XLIII, 50), understanding by
this word Masr nothing other than Egypt. The word masr, in Arabic, has the sense of "line of
demarcation between two lands"; and the people of Hegr commonly say, it is asserted: "I have
bought the house masran," that is, "with its limits."

In his book entitled In Praise of Egypt, El-Gahez says that Egypt received the name of Masr
because men head there and gather there; likewise one has named masir el-gouf (internal
passage, or intestine), masir (path), or masran the path followed by food. The word masr, in
the sense of locality, makes in the plural amsar, and the plural of the masir of food is
masran. But the Masr that occupies us (Egypt) has no plural, for it designates a unique
thing.

"I was, El-Akhtal said one day, on the point of embracing Islam, when I gave it up." "Why
was that?" he was asked. "I had come to my wife; I was very hungry and asked her for
something to eat. She said to the servant: Put on the fire for Abi Malek a masir (a piece of
tripe). Which she did. A moment later I again asked to eat. My wife cried: Hey! servant,
where is the masir of Abi Malek? -- On the fire, answered the servant. -- I considered this
reply a bad omen and, although on the point of converting to Islam, I gave it up." [The
joke turns on masir meaning both "tripe" and "destiny/end."] El-Gouhari, in his book Of
Exact Terms, says: Masr designates a particular town [...]

[PDF p. 91]

and is of the masculine gender as well as the feminine, according to Ibn Sareg. One calls
Masran the two towns of El-Koufat and Basrat. Ibn Khalouïat, in one of his books, says:
"No one has yet explained to us why Egypt was formerly called Maqdouniah, unless this word
comes from Hebrew; for Maqdouniah in that language means 'refuge,' and this name will have
been given to Egypt because Bensar, son of Cham, withdrew there. The Greeks claim that all
of Macedonia forms a religious property belonging to the great church of Constantinople,
and they give the name of land of Maqdouniah to the region of El-Ausofia, a region that,
for them, comprises Alexandria with all its dependencies -- that is, all of Egypt, except
the upper Said." Masr has also been given the name of Omm-Khannour (mother of benefits),
the word khannour meaning benefit. The word masr also means "line of demarcation between
two things"; thus the poet, describing (the work) of God, said:

    He set the sun as a visible separation
        between day and night, to delimit them.

This verse is by 'Adi ben Zeïd el-'Abadi; others attribute it to El-Ommyah ben es-Solt
eth-Thaqfi. It is part of the piece that begins thus:

    Listen to an account that one day you will recite
        by heart, if someone comes to question you.
    How the world was in the beginning, then
        how God spread his benefits upon it, and showed us, from the first, his generosity.
    There was then only the wind, the foaming torrent,
        and the darkness that left empty neither hole nor cleft.
    God commanded the black darkness and it withdrew,
        and he removed the water from the places where it was spread.
    He spread the earth like a carpet and placed it
        under the sky, well balanced and without the least deviation.
    Then he set the sun, as a visible limit
        between day and night, to separate them.
    He placed in the sky the torches that light us,
        without their costing us either oil or wick.
    In six days he completed his creation,
        whose last work was the formation of man.

[PDF p. 92]

    God took the clay and formed it (man),
        and, when he saw it finished and well proportioned,
    he called it aloud: Adam! and the man answered him.
        Then he breathed the soul into the body he had created,
    and gave man paradise as his abode,
        and created him a companion from a rib drawn from his flank.
    God forbade man but one single thing:
        to taste nothing and eat nothing of the excellent tree.
    The spotted serpent was, when it was created,
        similar in its form to a she-camel or a camel.
    And God cursed it because it had tempted his creature:
        through all the nights -- and this curse will have no end --
    it will drag its belly on the earth as long as it lives,
        and it will eat dust, whether on mountain or on plain.

El-Hafiz Abou-l-Khattab Magd ed-din Omar ben Dahiat says that Egypt is the most fertile of
the lands of God. God gave it the name of Masr, and this name, according to all the
readings -- and if one neglects the nunnation -- applies to no other country. This word
does not take the nunnation, for it is a proper noun derived from a masculine noun. It
unites therefore two qualities: it is proper and feminine, and cannot, in consequence,
take the nunnation. For us, it derives from the expression "the ewe was milked," which is
used to say that the milk was taken from its udder. And Egypt was named Masr because of the
abundance of the goods it contains and that are not found elsewhere; its inhabitants enjoy
all the goods it produces, and it is with it as with the ewe whose milk, wool, and young
are used. According to Ibn el-'Arabi, the word masr means "vessel"; thus the intestines are
named masir, in the plural masran and masarin; likewise Egypt, which is like the treasury
of the earth.

Abou Zarr el-Ghafari, one of the companions of the Prophet, says that Egypt is the treasury
of the whole earth. Do you not see what Joseph says: "Place me at the head of the treasury
of the land, for I am a wise guardian" (Koran, XII, 55). God then gave him Egypt as his
share, and its treasures belonged to all, as El-Houfi explains in his commentary. El-Bakri
says: Omm-Khannour, with a fatha on the first letter, a tashdid on the second, and an
unpointed re, is a name of Egypt. Artah ben Shahbat said: "O tribe of Zabian, preserve your
blood and be not like the people of Omm-Khannour," meaning: Be not cowards, do not remain
exposed to the attacks of whoever

[PDF p. 93]

wishes to attack you, and do not let them take from you what pleases them, as happens with
the tax in Egypt -- that is, in Omm-Khannour. Kora says: "Omm-Khannour means benefit; it is
for this reason that Egypt was named Omm-Khannour, because of the abundance of its goods."
-- Ali ben Hamzah says: Egypt was surnamed Omm-Khannour because it draws to itself all those
whose life is short. The hyena also bears the name of khannour (or khannouz), with a re or a
zeïn. -- Ibn Qoteibah, in his Marvels of the Traditions, says that masr means "limit," and
that the people of Hegr write in their contracts: "I have bought the house masran," meaning
with its limits. El-'Adi ben Zeïd said:

    He set the sun as a visible barrier
        between day and night, to separate them.

[PDF p. 94]

CHAPTER VIII
A GLANCE AT THE RELATIONS OF EGYPT WITH RELIGION
[Footnote: the word manaqib properly means "virtues, qualities," but has a wider sense than
the French word and applies to all that touches, closely or remotely, on the Koran and the
traditions of Islam.]

Egypt has considerable advantages, and among others that of having been cited by God, in
his venerated book, some twenty times, sometimes directly, sometimes indirectly and by
allusion.

God said: "Go down into Masr, for you will find there what you ask" (Koran, II, 58). Abou
Mohammed Abd el-Haq, son of Atiah, says on this subject, in his commentary: "Most people
read Masr with the tanwin (nunnation), which is the reading of all the Korans, except a few
copies of Osman." According to Mogahed and others, those who give this word the nunnation
understand by Masr any town whatever, relying on the context of the Koran which, according
to them, signifies that it is enjoined (on the Israelites) to enter into the village, and
on the tradition which says that on leaving Tih they inhabited Syria. A certain number of
the partisans of the nunnation claim that God, in this passage, meant to designate Pharaoh's
own Masr, and rely on the passage of the Koran where God allotted to the Beni Israel the
dwellings of Pharaoh and his monuments. In this case the nunnation would be admitted because,
according to El-Akhfach, the pronunciation of this word is in common use, similar to that of
the words Hind and Da'd. Sibaouya is not of this opinion, and others besides El-Akhfach
recognize that God meant any place of dwelling and apply the tanwin, while El-Hassan, Abou
ben Taleb, and others read: "Go down into Masr," without nunnation. Such is the reading of
Abaï ben Ka'b, who declares: "This Masr is the Masr of Pharaoh." -- "This Masr," says
El-'Amach, "is the Masr of which Saleh ben Ali is governor." --

[PDF p. 95]

"Malek said to me," recounts Achhab, "For me it is a question of Masr your country, the
abode of Pharaoh."

God said: "Enter into Masr, and, God willing, you will be in safety there" (Koran, XII,
100). Abou Ga'far Mohammed ben Garir et-Tabari, in his commentary, says, on the authority
of Farqad es-Sabakhi: "Joseph went to meet Jacob, and the Egyptians escorted him,
acclaiming him. When Joseph and Jacob were in sight of each other, the latter was going on
foot, leaning on one of his sons named Juda, to whom he said, seeing the horses and the
crowd: 'O Juda, it is the Pharaoh of Egypt.' 'No,' answered Juda, 'it is your son.' And when
they were near each other, Jacob said to Joseph: 'Greeting to you who remove sorrow from
me,' using the expression: 'O you who remove sorrow from me.'" [Footnote: Maqrizi dwells on
the expression used by Jacob, which is unusual; regularly it should be otherwise phrased.]

God said: "We gave this order to Moses and his brother: Take for your people houses in Masr
and make of your houses places of prayer where you may pray" (Koran, X, 87). Et-Tabari
reports, on the authority of Ibn Abbas and others, that the Beni Israïl feared Pharaoh and
that they received the order to make of their houses oratories to pray in. Qotadah says that
this happened at the time when Pharaoh prevented the Israelites from praying, and that they
received the order to install their oratories in their houses and to turn (in praying)
toward the qiblah. According to Mogahed, the expression "your houses as qiblah" means: in
the direction of the Kaaba; as Moses and his people, for fear of Pharaoh, dared not pray in
public temples, they received the order to install in their houses oratories turned toward
the Kaaba, to pray there in secret. According to Mogahed, in the phrase "Take for your
people dwellings in Masr," Masr means Alexandria.

God said, speaking of Pharaoh: "He said: Does not the kingdom of Egypt belong to me, is it
not under my authority that these canals flow? Do you not see it?" (Koran, XLIII, 50) Ibn
Abd el-Hakem and Abou Saïd Abd er-Rahman ben Ahmed ben Younes and others say, on the
authority of Abou Zahm es-Samal, that, in the verse "Does not the kingdom of Egypt belong to
me? Is it not under my authority that these canals flow," God meant to give to understand
that there [...]

[PDF p. 96]

was then on earth no king more powerful than the king of Egypt, and that all the peoples of
all countries had need of Egypt; as for the canals, they were furnished with bridges and
dams wisely and skillfully arranged, so that the water flowed at the foot of the houses and
courtyards, the Egyptians directing it as they pleased.

Such are the verses where God speaks directly of Egypt in his august book; as for the
allusions he makes to this country, in other verses of this same book, they are very
numerous.

God said: "We assigned to the Beni Israïl a delightful place" (Koran, X, 93); and again:
"We gave them (Moses and Aaron) for an abode a fertile place full of springs" (Koran,
XXIII, 52). Ibn Abbas, Saïd ben el-Mosib, and Ouahb ben Monabbah say that by this one must
understand Egypt. Abd er-Rahman ben Zeïd ben Aslam says, on the authority of his father,
that it is a question of Alexandria.

God said: "We made them go out of gardens, of springs, of treasures, of a delightful
abode" (Koran, XXVI, 57-58); and again: "How many gardens they abandoned, how many springs,
how many cultivated fields, what a delightful and beneficent abode in which they resided
and which they enjoyed!" (Koran, XLIV, 24-26). Ibn Younes, concerning the verse "We made
them go out of gardens, springs, treasures, a delightful abode," says that, according to
Abou Zahm, these gardens were situated on the two banks of the Nile, from one end of Egypt
to the other, from Assouan to Rosetta; that there were seven canals: the canal of
Alexandria, that of Sakha (Xoïs), those of Damietta, of Serdous, of Memphis, of the Fayoum,
and the Menhi, all linked together and in no way separated; that the cultivated lands
covered the space between the two mountains from one extremity of Egypt to the other, which
the waters (of the inundation) reached; and that, at that time, the whole land of Egypt was
covered by the waters when the flood reached a height of sixteen cubits, so well arranged
were the barrages and dams. As for the places of comfort, they are, says the same author,
the minbars (pulpits for preaching), for there were a thousand of them in Egypt. Mogahed
and Saïd ben Gabir explain the words "places of comfort" by the word "pulpits." Qotadah
understands by this expression "the good and delightful things they enjoyed." And he adds:
"Indeed, by God! God made Pharaoh go out of his garden, his springs, his cultivated lands,
to cast him into the sea." Saïd ben Katir ben 'Afir recounts this:

[PDF p. 97]

"We were at Qobbat-el-Haoua, with El-Mamoun, at the time of his arrival in Egypt. The
caliph said to us: 'I do not know why Pharaoh was so marveled at Egypt when he cried: Does
not the kingdom of Egypt belong to me?' I spoke up: 'May I be permitted to speak, O
commander of the Faithful?' I asked. 'Speak,' he said to me. 'You no longer see,' I then
said, 'anything but ruined remains. For God said: We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people
had made and what they had built (Koran, VII, 133).' 'You are right,' answered El-Mamoun,
and he kept silent."

God said: "We wished to be benevolent toward those who, because of religion, were oppressed
on the earth; we made of them imams and our heirs, we made them powerful on the earth, and
through them we made Pharaoh, Haman, and their army come to what they dreaded" (Koran,
XXVIII, 4-5). And again, speaking of Pharaoh: "He said: O people, to you belongs the empire
today, you are the masters of the world" (Koran, XL, 30). And again: "The word of your
excellent master was accomplished for the Beni Israïl because of their patience, and we
destroyed what Pharaoh and his people had made and what they had built" (Koran, VII, 133).
And again, speaking of the people of Pharaoh: "Will you let Moses and his people destroy the
land (that is, the land of Egypt)?" (Koran, VII, 124); concerning Joseph, God reports that
he said: "Place me over the treasures of Egypt, for I am a wise guardian" (Koran, XII, 55).
According to the tradition reported by Ibn Younes, who had it from Abou Basra el-Ghafari,
Egypt is the treasury of the whole earth and its king is the king of the whole earth. Do
you not see what Joseph says to the king of Egypt: "Place me at the head of the treasures of
the land." Which was done, and Joseph made of Egypt a refuge, and its treasures were then
those of the inhabitants and the peoples of the whole earth.

God said: "Thus we made Joseph powerful on the earth, able to choose a dwelling wherever he
wished" (Koran, XII, 56). And Joseph, being king of Egypt, all the other kings of the whole
earth had need of him and of the things he administered.

God said, speaking of Moses: "He said: O our Lord, you have given Pharaoh and his subjects
splendor and riches in this world, that they may turn away from your path. O Lord, annihilate
their riches and harden their hearts, that they may not believe until they undergo the
terrible punishment!" (Koran, X, 88). And again: "Perhaps your Lord will make your enemies
perish and will install you as masters of the land, and he will see how you act" (Koran,
VIII, 126). And again: "Pharaoh said: Let

[PDF p. 98]

me kill Moses and let him invoke his God! for myself I fear that he will change your religion
and bring corruption upon the land (that is, the land of Egypt)" (Koran, XL, 27). And again:
"Pharaoh raised himself up on the land (that is, the land of Egypt)" (Koran, XXVIII, 35). And
again, speaking of one of Joseph's brothers: "I will not leave the land (that is, the land of
Egypt)" (Koran, XII, 80).

God said: "You wish then to be a tyrant on the land (that is, the land of Egypt)" (Koran,
XVIII, 18). Ibn Abbas says that Egypt is named "the whole land" in ten passages of the Koran.
Such are, as far as I recall, all the passages of the holy book of God where Egypt is
mentioned.

The virtues of Egypt are cited also in a number of traditions. Abd Allah ben Lahiat reports
this fact in the traditions relating to 'Amr ben el-As: "The commander of the Faithful Omar
told me that he had heard the Messenger of God say: When, after my death, God has opened for
you the land of Egypt, you will raise there a considerable army that will be the best of the
armies of the earth. 'And how is that, O Messenger of God?' asked Abou Bekr. 'Because they
will be in the vanguard until the day of resurrection.'" -- According to 'Amr ben el-Hamq,
the Prophet is said to have said: "There will be a sedition during which the most just and
the best of men will be (the warriors of) the army of the West; and that is why," he added,
"Egypt must be for you in the first rank." -- According to Tabi' ben 'Amer el-Kala'i: "I had,
he said, set out from Es-Saïfat and I met Abou Moussa el-Acha'ri, who asked me: Where do you
come from? -- From the land of Egypt, I answered. -- From the army of the West? -- Yes. --
The pitiful army! -- Is it so weak? I asked. -- Indeed, he said, no one can attack it without
God defending it! Go to Mo'az ben Gebal that he may teach it to you. -- I went to Mo'az ben
Gebal, who asked me: What did the old man tell you? I recounted it to him: What better thing
can you carry back to your country than this saying! he cried; write it on your tablets. And
when I had returned to Mo'az he informed me that this saying came from the Prophet of God."

Ibn Ouahb, among other traditions on Safouan ben 'Assal, reports this one: "I heard (it is
Safouan who speaks) the Prophet of God say: God has opened for repentance a gate situated to
the west, seventy years (of march) wide, which will not close until the sun rises from that
side."

[PDF p. 99]

Ibn Lahia, in his traditions on 'Amr ben el-As, recounts: "The commander of the Faithful
Omar told me that he had heard the Prophet of God say: After my death, God Most High and
sublime will open Egypt for you. Treat well the Copts who inhabit it, for between them and you
there is alliance and kinship."

Ibn Ouahb says: "Harmalat ben 'Amran en-Nagibi told me, on the authority of Abd er-Rahman ben
Shemasat el-Mahri, that Abou Zarar used to say: I heard the Prophet of God say: You will
conquer a land where they count by qirats; treat its inhabitants well, for there is between
them and you kinship and alliance; and when you see there two men disputing over the location
of a brick, then leave it." Now, having passed near Rabiat and Abd er-Rahman, the two sons of
Sharhabil, he saw them disputing over the location of a brick, and he left Egypt. According to
another tradition, this is what the Prophet is said to have said: "You will conquer Egypt, the
land where they count by qirats; when you have conquered it, treat its inhabitants well, for
there is between them and you kinship and alliance"; and, according to other texts, "alliance
and consanguinity." The traditions of Malek and El-Leits add: "treat the Copts well." Mouslim
put in his book Of the Authentic Traditions these accounts, which he had borrowed from
Abou-t-Taher, who had them from Ouahb.

Ibn Shehab reports the opinion that makes the mother of Ismaïl a woman of this nation.
El-Leits ben Sa'd recounts: "I asked Ibn Shehab: What is this kinship? -- The mother of
Ismaïl, son of Ibrahim, was of this people, he answered me." -- "I asked Ez-Zahari," recounts
Mohammed ben Ishaq, "what was this kinship of which the Prophet spoke, and he said to me:
Hagar, mother of Ismaïl, was of this nation."

Among other traditions relating to Abou Salam el-Gishani, Ibn Lahi'at recounts that one of
the companions of the Prophet had heard him say: "You will possess armies, but the best of
your armies will be composed of the men of the West. Fear God therefore concerning the Copts,
and do not devour them like vegetables." According to Mouslim ben Yesar, the Prophet is said
to have said: "Treat the Copts well, for you will find them your best auxiliaries for fighting
your enemies."

Abou Salamat ben Abd er-Rahman, says Yezid ben Abou Habib, told me that at the moment of his
death, the Prophet of God recommended making the

[PDF p. 100]

Jews go out of the Arabian peninsula, adding: "Fear God, fear God concerning the Copts of
Egypt, for you will subdue them and they will be for you excellent auxiliaries in the ways of
God."

Ibn Ouahb reports, on the authority of Moussa ben Ayoub el-Rhafeqi, who had it from a man of
Rend, that the Prophet of God, being ill, fainted, then, coming to himself, cried: "Treat
well the people of brown skin and curly hair." A second time he fainted and, on waking,
repeated the same thing. A third time he lost consciousness and, having come to himself,
repeated the same words. And those present said to one another: "What if we asked the Prophet
what he means by the people of brown skin and curly hair?" And they asked him on his waking.
"They are," said the Prophet, "the Copts of Egypt, for they are your uncles and your
fathers-in-law, and they will help you against your enemies in the accomplishment of your
religion." "And how," it was asked, "will they help us in the accomplishment of our religion,
O Prophet of God?" "They will spare you," he answered, "the labors of this world, and your
time will be free for prayer. Those who let them be ill-treated will be as if they ill-treated
them themselves, and those who hate their oppressors will be as if they had removed oppression
from them."

Amr ben Harib and Abd er-Rahman el-Halebi assert that the Prophet is said to have said: "You
will be the masters of a people with curly heads; treat them well, for, with God's permission,
they will be for you a strength and a help against your enemies." This is a question of the
Copts of Egypt.

A servant of Afrat, reports Ibn Lahi'at, told me that the Prophet of God had said: "Fear God,
fear God concerning the people of the black land who have brown skin and curly hair, for there
is between them and you kinship and alliance." The alliance, added 'Amr, the servant of Afrat,
means that the Prophet of God took among them a concubine, and the kinship that the mother of
Ismaïl was of their race.

Ibn Ouahb says: "Ibn Lahi'at told me that the mother of Ismaïl, Hagar, was of Omm-el-Arab, a
village situated opposite Farma, in Egypt."

Merouan el-Qosas (the shearer) says that three prophets had Copts for fathers-in-law: Abraham,
the Beloved of God, took Hagar for a concubine; Joseph married the daughter of the lord of
'Aïn-Shams; and the Prophet of God took for [...]

[PDF p. 101]

a concubine, Maria. According to Yezid ben Abou Habib, the birthplace of Hagar was the
village of Baq, in the vicinity of Omm-Danin. The Arabs, asserts Hecham, say indifferently
Hagar and Agar, exchanging the he and the alif, just as one says (two forms for "to pour
water") and other analogous examples.

According to Omar ben el-Khattab, there are, it is said, seven Masr: the town that is also
called a masr, Syria which is a masr, Egypt (whose name is Masir), Mesopotamia, El-Bahraïn,
Basrah, and Koufah. Mokhoul reports that the first region destroyed was Armenia and the
second Egypt. -- "The Copts," says Abd Allah ben Omar, "are the most generous of the
barbarians (the non-Arabs), those whose hand is most widely open, and whose origin is the
most illustrious; by alliance, they are also, of all men, the closest to the Arabs in
general and to the Qoreïchites in particular. Let whoever wishes to have an idea of Paradise,
or to see something approaching it in this world, cast his eyes on the land of Egypt, when
the crops are green and the fruits begin to form!" -- "He who wishes to see something
resembling Paradise," says Ka'b el-Ahbar, "has only to look at Egypt in the season of autumn"
-- or, according to another reading, "when it is in flower."

[PDF p. 102]

CHAPTER IX
OF THE PARTICULARITIES FOUND IN EGYPT

Among the inhabitants of Egypt were those magicians who all, at the same hour, converted;
and one knows of no mass conversion more important than that of the Copts. According to Yezid
ben Abou Habib and other authors, there were twelve chief magicians, each commanding twenty
lieutenants, each lieutenant having under his orders a thousand sorcerers; the number of
sorcerers thus amounted to two hundred forty thousand two hundred fifty-two, including the
chiefs and the lieutenants. And when they saw what was given them to see [the prodigies
worked by Moses before Pharaoh; cf. Koran, ch. XX, verses 60-78], they recognized that this
came from heaven and that magic could do nothing against the orders of God. The twelve chiefs
fell prostrate, their lieutenants imitated them, followed by all the others. And all cried:
"We believe in the Master of men, in the Lord of Moses and Aaron" (Koran, XX, 73). Tabi'
reports that these magicians accompanied Moses and that none of them followed in their
perjury the unfaithful Israelites who worshiped the (golden) calf; the same author says that
no people converted at once in as great a number as the Copts.

According to Ka'b el-Ahbar, the Copts of Egypt may be compared to a garden which, the more
it is pruned, the more it produces; it is through them and their stratagems that God will
annihilate the islands of Roum.

Abd Allah ben 'Amr says that the world was created according to five forms recalling the five
parts of the bird: the head, the breast, the two wings, and the tail. The head is represented
by Mecca, Medina, and Yemen; the breast by Syria and Egypt; the right wing by Iraq, the
people of the Ouak beyond Iraq, and the people of the Ouakouak beyond the Ouak, and finally,
beyond these last, by peoples known to God alone; to the left wing

[PDF p. 103]

correspond the Hind, and beyond the Hind, the Sind; beyond the Sind, the people of the Nasek;
beyond the Nasek, the Mounsek; and beyond the Mounsek, peoples known to God alone. The tail
extends from Zat-el-Homam to the setting sun; and the tail is the most detestable part of the
bird.

According to El-Gahez, there are ten (qualities or defects attributed to ten) towns: industry
at Basrah, eloquence at Koufah, gentleness at Bagdad, stammering at Er-Raï, envy at Nisapour,
beauty at Herat, braggadocio at Samarkand, virility at Balkh, commerce in Egypt, and avarice
at Merw. -- The word (braggadocio) means "word not followed by action."

Yahia ben Dakher el-Haferi recounts having heard 'Amr ben el-As say in a speech: "Know that
you will be under arms until the day of judgment, for you will be ceaselessly surrounded by
enemies whose hearts will be constantly jealous both of you and of your dwelling-place, a
mine of harvests and riches, of abundant goods and growing blessings." Abd er-Rahman ben
Ghanem el-Acha'ri reports that, having come from Syria to Abd Allah ben 'Amr ben el-As, the
latter asked him: "Why have you come to our country?" "You had told me," answered El-Acha'ri,
"that Egypt was, of all the countries of the earth, the most ruined, and I see you taking
lands, raising palaces, and installing yourself there more and more." "It is," said Abd
Allah, "that the time of ruin is past for Egypt since the conquest of Bokht-Nasr
(Nebuchadnezzar), who left there only lions and hyenas. Today it is the country of the earth
that possesses the best soil and whose ruin is the most distant. Never will the blessing
cease there as long as there is any blessing on the earth."

Egypt occupies, it is said, the center of the world and does not have to suffer from the heat
of the first two climes nor the cold of the last two. Situated in the third clime, the air
there is healthy, the heat temperate, and the cold not very rigorous. Its inhabitants are
preserved from the winters of El-Ahouaz, the summers of Oman, the storms of Tehamat, the
pustules of Mesopotamia, the scabies of Yemen, the plagues of Syria, the pleurisies of Iraq,
the scorpions of Askar-Mokram, the splenitis of El-Bahraïn, the fevers of Kheïbar; they are
safe from the incursions of the Turks, the armies of Roum, the depredations of the Arabs,
the trickeries of the Dilemites, the razzias of the Carmathians, as well as from the
drying-up of the rivers or the famine caused by the lack of rain.

[PDF p. 104]

Egypt is divided into eighty districts; and there is not a single one that does not contain
astonishing and marvelous things -- in the way of products, monuments, things good to drink
or eat, objects useful to man or worthy of being deposited in the treasury of kings. These
things are renowned both within the district and outside it, and everything a district
produces bears its name.

The Said (Upper Egypt) is a terrain similar to that of the Hedjaz; the heat there is the
same as in Iraq; it produces the date-palm, the acacia, the doum-palm, and the achr.
[Footnote: Kazimirski renders this word as Asclepias gigantea. It is a broad-leaved shrub
still found in quantity at Gebel-Silsileh. The wood, somewhat spongy, dries very quickly and
readily gives fire by friction; the inhabitants of Silsileh use it for that purpose.] Lower
Egypt resembles Syria; it rains there as in Syria, and the fruits of Syria ripen there, such
as the vine, the olive, the almond, the fig, the walnut, and all sorts of fruits, vegetables,
and flowers. Snow and hail also fall there. The districts of Alexandria, of Libya, of
Maraqiah are only deserts, mountains, and gardens where the vine and the olive grow; these
are lands of camels and sheep, of honey and milk.

Each district of Egypt possesses a town containing magnificent constructions of stone or
marble and marvelous objects. Its Nile is furrowed with boats, each of which can carry the
load of five hundred camels. Each of the villages of Egypt may be considered a town; this is
what God said: "Send into the towns messengers to gather (troops)" (Koran, XXVI, 35). Various
industries are common in Egypt, among others that of the ovens in which hen's eggs are
hatched. The oven is given the normal heat of the brooding hen, and the chicks come out of
these ovens; it is thus that most of the chickens of Egypt are produced, and it is only in
Egypt that this industry is practiced.

Omar ben Maïmoun recounts that, the day after the departure of Moses with the Beni Israel,
Pharaoh had a ewe brought to him, and, the ewe having come, had it slaughtered, declaring
that they would not finish skinning it until he had gathered around him five hundred thousand
Egyptians; this number of men having been gathered, Pharaoh said: "Indeed, these people are
very few!" The companions of Moses numbered only six hundred seventy thousand.

[PDF p. 105]

A writer [Maçaoudi, Meadows of Gold, ed. Barbier de Meynard, vol. II, p. 235], wishing to
give an idea of Egypt, said: "For three months it is like a white pearl; for three months,
like a piece of black musk; for three months, like a green emerald; for three months, like
an ingot of red gold. The white pearl is Egypt during the months of Abib, Mesari, and Thoth,
during which it is covered by the waters; the land is then all white, and the villages, on
the tops of the mounds and hills, are like stars; the water surrounds them on all sides and
one can reach them only by boat. -- The black musk is Egypt during the months of Babah,
Hathor, and Kihak, when the water withdraws from the land, which appears black; it is at this
moment that the sowing is done. -- The green emerald is Egypt during the months of Tobah,
Amchir, and Barmahat; the plants then come out of the earth, it is spring, and Egypt is green
as an emerald. -- The red ingot is Egypt during the months of Bermoudah, Bachons, and Baounah;
the plants flower, the harvests are ripe and good to reap, and Egypt becomes like an ingot of
gold in aspect and in value."

A caliph asked El-Leits ben Sa'd what was the best moment of Egypt. "It is," he said, "when
the waters have withdrawn, the diseases have ceased, the land has dried, and the pastures are
ready."

Another said: "Its Nile is a marvel, its soil is gold, its goods are (a source of) profit;
its possession enriches like plunder [that is, without trouble and without long cares], its
riches are envied, its people are unsubmissive and obey only through fear, and its treaties
are without consistency; they make war to plunder; it belongs to whoever seizes it."

Another said: "Egypt counts among the mistresses of the villages and the queens of the
towns."

Zeïd ben Aslam, concerning the verse "If he does not water it with heavy rains, he will moisten
it with light rains" (Koran, II, 267), says that it is a question of Egypt; indeed, if it does
not rain there, it is at its apogee, and if it rains there, it weakens. This is what Maçaoudi
says in his history [Meadows of Gold, ed. Barbier de Meynard, vol. II, p. 36]: [...]

[PDF p. 106]

It is reported that God, having created Adam, showed him the world to the east and the west
-- its plains, its mountains, its rivers, its seas, its constructions, its desert parts, the
peoples who were to inhabit it, the kings who were to govern it; and when he saw Egypt, a
plain crossed by a river issued from Paradise and carrying blessing within it; when he saw
one of its two mountains resplendent with light and ceaselessly favored with the sight of the
Lord, by his mercy, having at its foot trees laden with fruit while its summit was lost in
Paradise, watered by the waters of compassion, Adam invoked God that he might bless the Nile,
and be merciful to the land of Egypt and grant it felicity and strength; and he blessed seven
times the Nile and the mountain, saying: "O mountain full of mercy, your foot is Paradise,
your soil is a musk in which are buried the planters of the garden of Paradise; preserving,
obedient, and pitiful land, O Egypt, may blessing never cease in you, may preservation never
cease for you, and may royalty and power never move away from you! O land of Egypt, in you
are wealth and treasures, to you belong felicity and prosperity. May your Nile flow like
honey! may God multiply your crops; may he swell your udders, may he make your plants grow!
may the blessing that is in you grow! Be fertile, and may your goods never cease for you as
long as you are neither violent, nor proud, nor treacherous! But if you become such, may your
enemies treat you with violence and may your goods vanish!" And Adam was the first who prayed
God to grant Egypt pity, fertility, mercy, and blessing.

According to Ibn Abbas, Noah invoked God for Masr, son of Bensar, son of Cham, saying: "O my
God, this one has answered my call, bless him as well as his posterity, give him for a domain
the blessed land, mother of nations and refuge of the servants of God; the one whose river is
the most excellent of the rivers of the earth, and put in this country the best of blessings.
Subdue it for Masr and for his descendants; submit it to them and make them strong over it."

Ka'b el-Ahbar said: "If I did not have the desire to inhabit Jerusalem, I would wish to
inhabit no other country than Egypt." And as he was asked why, he answered: "Because it is a
country safe from sedition, and those who wish to harm it are repulsed by God himself; it is a
blessed country, as are those who inhabit it."

[PDF p. 107]

One reads in Ibn Ouahb: Yahia ben Ayoub, who had it from Khaled ben Yezid, who had heard it
from Ibn Abou Halal, told me that Ka'b el-Ahbar is said to have said: "I love Egypt and its
inhabitants, for Egypt is a country protected (by God) and its inhabitants are generous, which
distinguishes them from other peoples." -- It is said, in certain books that treat of the
divine sciences, that Egypt is the treasury of the whole earth, and that those who wish to
attack it are broken by God himself.

"The general government of Egypt," 'Amr ben el-As used to say, "is by itself worth the
caliphate." By "general government" must be understood the union of the financial
administration and the military command of the country. [Footnote: these two functions were
most often filled by two distinct persons. See on this subject Casanova, Notice sur quelques
poids de verre (Bulletin de l'Institut egyptien, 1891), where the distinction between the two
powers is clearly determined.]

According to Ahmed ben Modabber, Egypt could put under cultivation twenty-eight million
feddans, but it cultivates only one million. [Footnote: a feddan is a measure of surface area
equivalent to about 4,000 square meters.] And, he adds, after having traversed Egypt, I
recognized that the uncultivated part of Egypt is by far more considerable than the cultivated
part; if the sultan applied himself to putting the whole into productive use, he would draw
from it a revenue equal to the yield of the whole world.

Someone said that the revenue of Iraq was never higher than in the time of Omar ibn Abd
el-Aziz, the period when it reached one million seventeen thousand dirhems, and that the
revenue of Egypt was never lower than in the time of 'Amr ben el-As, the period when it
nevertheless reached twelve million dinars. The provinces of Syria yielded fourteen million,
not counting the revenue of the frontier towns.

Egypt counts, among other merits, that of having given birth to three prophets: Moses, Aaron,
and Joshua. And it is recounted that Jesus, son of Mary, going to Syria, was skirting the foot
of the Moqattam when, turning to his mother, he said to her: "O my mother, here is the
cemetery of the people of Mohammed." It is reported that Jesus was born at the village of
Ahnas in the region of the Said of Egypt, and that there is a palm tree there that would be
the palm tree cited in the Koran in the verse where it is said: "Shake the trunk of the palm
tree" (Koran, XIX, 25). This account is erroneous, for

[PDF p. 108]

everyone agrees -- both the priests of the Bible and the wisest of the Muslims -- in
recognizing that Jesus was born at the village of Bethlehem, in the district of Jerusalem.

The prophets who came to Egypt are Ibrahim, the Beloved of God, whose story will be found in
this book in the chapter of the Canal of Cairo; Jacob; Joseph; and the patriarchs whose
history is reported in the chapter of the Fayoum. Jeremiah also came there.

He was an Egyptian too, that member of the family of Pharaoh who converted (to the true
faith), and to whom God, in the Koran (XL, 29), accords such great praise. He was, it is said,
the very son of Pharaoh, but I believe this assertion false.

They were Egyptians too, those councilors of Pharaoh whose superior intelligence God praises,
and the wise advice they gave when Pharaoh consulted them about Moses and Aaron. Here is what
God says: "Pharaoh said to the great ones around him: That one is a skillful sorcerer who, by
his magic, will compel you to leave your country. What do you advise me to do? -- And the
great ones answered: Defer him and his brother and send into all the towns messengers who will
bring you back the most skillful sorcerers" (Koran, XXVI, 33-36). What a difference with what
the companions of Nimrod said about Ibrahim, when they advised him to put him to death. Here
is what God says of it: "They said: Burn him and give the victory to your gods, if you wish"
(Koran, XXI, 68).

She was Egyptian, the wife of Pharaoh whom God praises in his holy book, when he says: "God
has given an example in the wife of Pharaoh, who said: Lord, build me near you a house in
Paradise, and save me from Pharaoh and his acts, save me from the people of iniquity" (Koran,
LXVI, 11).

She was Egyptian, the hairdresser of Pharaoh's daughter who believed in Moses, whom Pharaoh
had combed with an iron comb, as one combs flax, and who remained firm in her faith in God.

Sa'd el-Loghaoui, in his book Of the Biography of Peoples, reports that all the sciences known
before the flood had been taught by the first Hermes, who dwelt in the upper Said of Egypt.
This Hermes was the first to treat of the celestial substances and the movement of the stars;
he was the first to raise temples to worship God in; he was the first to occupy himself with
the science of

[PDF p. 109]

medicine and composed for his contemporaries well-measured poems on terrestrial and celestial
things. It is said also that he was the first to foresee the flood, and to sense that a
celestial cataclysm was going to fall upon the earth, in the form of fire or water; so,
fearing the annihilation of the sciences and the disappearance of the industrial processes, he
built the pyramids and the temples of Upper Egypt, represented there the trades and the tools,
and engraved there the explanation of the sciences, with the aim of transmitting them to those
who would come after him and for fear of seeing them disappear from the world. This Hermes is
the same as Edris.

Abou Mohammed el-Hasan ben Ismaïl ben el-Farat, in his Chronicles of Egypt, says that El-Khidr
crossed the sea with Moses, with whom he was in favor.

In Egypt have been found a host of sages who, by their words, their wisdom, and their counsels,
civilized the world. Among other sciences they cultivated medicine, astronomy, geometry, the
science of engineers, chemistry, and the science of talismans. Formerly, it is said, the
seekers of knowledge came to Egypt to broaden their intelligence, fortify their reason, enlarge
their mind, and refine their perspicacity.

Among other merits, Egypt has also that of abundantly supplying provisions to the inhabitants
of the two holy cities (Mecca and Medina). Egypt is the port of the world and exports its
riches everywhere. By Suez, it ships to the two holy cities, to Yemen, to the Hind, to China,
to the Sind, to Oman, and to Chahr; by Tams, Damietta, and Farma, to the lands of Roum and of
the Franks, to the coasts of Syria and, by the frontier towns of this last country, as far as
the confines of Iraq. Alexandria communicates with Crete, Sicily, and [the lands of the
setting sun]. By [the Nile it reaches] Nubia, the land of the Beggas [and Yemen]. There are in
Egypt a number of frontier-posts constantly under arms for the safety of the religion; these
are Bourlos, [Rosetta,] Alexandria, Zat-el-Homam, Beherah, Akhna, Damietta, Shata, Tad,
Achtoum, Farma, Ouaradah, El-Arich, Assouan, Qous, and the oases. [In Egypt are] the pyramids,
the temples, the convents, the churches, and

[PDF p. 110]

its inhabitants can do without all other countries, to such a point that if a wall were raised
between Egypt and the rest of the earth, Egypt, thanks to its riches, would allow its
inhabitants to do without all other countries.

It is in Egypt that the essence of balsam is prepared, whose usefulness is considerable. The
kings of the earth send to fetch it in Egypt and preserve it with care. The Christian kings
seek it ardently, and the Christians attribute to it so great a virtue that they would not
believe themselves truly Christian if a little of this essence were not mixed with the
baptismal water in which the neophyte is plunged.

It is there too that one finds the soqonqour (skink), whose usefulness is undeniable; one also
meets there the ichneumon and the weasel, great destroyers of serpents; it is said even that
without the ichneumons and the weasels, the serpents would render Egypt uninhabitable. One
finds there too the trembling fish (electric catfish), marvelously effective for restoring
health to the feverish, if it is suspended above the patient. Egypt also produces an acacia
wood that has no equal in its property; if one burns it for a whole day under a cauldron, no
ashes remain; it is very easy to break; it kindles easily but is extinguished only with the
greatest difficulty. It is, it is said, the same tree as the ebony, whose color the soil of
Egypt is said to have changed, making it red.

Egypt produces opium, an extract of the poppy whose usefulness is contested only by the
ignorant. One also met there the henbane, a kind of berry the size of a green almond; it was
one of the best products of Egypt, but it disappeared before the year 700 of the hijra [16
September 1300 to 1301].

There one also finds the citron. The historian Abou Daoud, in his book Of Alms, says: "I
measured in Egypt a cucumber of thirteen spans, and I saw a citron which, cut in two, sufficed
to make the double load of a camel." Maçaoudi, in his history, says: The round citron was
brought from India after the year 300 of the hijra [18 August 912 to 6 August 913]; it was
first planted at Oman, whence it was transported to Basrah, into Iraq and Syria; it spread
first to Tarsus and the other Syrian ports, then to Antioch, on the coasts of Syria, in
Palestine [...]

[PDF p. 111]

and in Egypt, where it was not yet known. There it lost its magnificent bright red color, the
color it has in India and that is the best; for in Egypt it is deprived of the air, the soil,
and the properties of its native land.

There are found in Egypt mines of emerald, of naphtha, of alum, and of beram [Footnote: a
kind of fireproof stone from which pots and cauldrons were made], and quarries of marble.
There were in Egypt thirty kinds of metals, it is said.

The Egyptians feed on the product of the fishing of the sea of Roum and the sea of Qolzoum,
which always give them fresh fish, for the distance separating these two seas, from Qolzoum
to Farma, is only a day's and a night's march. This space forms the separation spoken of in
the Koran: "He has put a barrier between the two seas" (Koran, XXV, 53) -- that is, between
the sea of Roum and the sea of Qolzoum -- and in this other passage: "He has prevented the
two seas from rejoining, casting between them a barrier that opposes their union" (Koran, XXV,
53). According to the commentators, this barrier is the space between Qolzoum and Farma.

One of the particularities of Egypt is that in each of the months of the Coptic year, one
finds some food or some perfume peculiar to that month and unknown in the others. Thus one
says: the dates of Thoth, the pomegranates of Babah, the bananas of Hathor, the fish of
Kihak, the water of Tobah, the mutton of Amchir, the milk of Barmahat, the roses of
Barmoudah, the nobaq [the fruit of the jujube, very widespread in Egypt -- Zizyphus spina
Christi] of Bachons, the figs of Boonah, the honey of Abib, the grapes of Mesori.

One may say that the summer of this country is an autumn, so much fruit is found there, and
that its winter is a spring, for it is the season when clover and flax are harvested. Egypt,
moreover, enjoys this advantage of producing fruits when there are none in other countries.
Another advantage is that during the summer the Egyptians have no need to pitch tents or dig
shelters in the earth, as one is obliged to do at Bagdad, nor, during the winter, to wear
furs or to heat themselves, as one must do in Syria. In Egypt one has no need either to use
ice in summer.

[PDF p. 112]

One commonly says: the emerald of Egypt, the caftans of Egypt, the asses of Egypt, the
serpents of Egypt. The usefulness of these last in theriac is considerable.

One of the merits of Egypt is to have furnished the piece of marble placed in the wall of the
Kaaba. It was shipped by Mohammed ben Ta'rif, freedman of Abbas ben Mohammed, in the year 241
[22 May 855 to 9 May 856], with another piece of green marble; both were sent as a gift to
the Stone, and one of them is placed on the exterior of the wall surrounding the Kaaba. They
are the two finest pieces of green marble in the mosque; their keeper, Abd-Allah ben Mohammed
ben Daoud, gives the measure of one of them, which reaches a cubit and three fingers; this at
least is what El-Fakhri reports in his history of Mecca.

Another merit of Egypt is to have furnished a concubine to the Prophet, who had children by
the Egyptian woman, while his other wives, non-Arab, remained sterile.

Here is what Ibn Abd el-Hakem recounts on this subject. In the year 6 of the hijra of the
Prophet [23 May 627 to 10 May 628], when the latter was returning from El-Hadibiah, he sent
messages to the kings. Hateb ben Abou Balta'ah also set out with a letter from the Prophet.
Arrived at Alexandria, he found El-Maqoqos seated in a pavilion overlooking the sea; Hateb
took a boat, advanced over the sea, and, when he was in sight of the pavilion, made a sign to
El-Maqoqos with the Prophet's letter between his fingers. El-Maqoqos, having seen him, had the
letter brought to him; it was taken. Then El-Maqoqos had the messenger brought to him also,
who went to him. After reading the letter, El-Maqoqos said to Hateb: "What prevents Mohammed,
if he is a prophet, from invoking God against me and vanquishing me?" "What then," answered
Hateb, "prevented Jesus, son of Mary, from invoking God against those who misknew him and
doing with them what he would have wished?" El-Maqoqos was silent a moment, then asked Hateb
to repeat what he had just said: Hateb repeated it, and El-Maqoqos kept silent. Hateb resumed:
"Before you there existed a man who had himself called the Lord Most High; God used him for
his vengeances, and then took vengeance on him.

[PDF p. 113]

Take example from others than yourself and not from yourself. If you have a religion, leave it
only for a better -- that is, for Islam, by which God compensates everything else. Moses
prophesied Jesus, as Jesus prophesied Mohammed, and we invite you to believe in the Koran only
as you yourself have invited the people of the Torah to believe in the Gospel; we do not
forbid you to follow the religion of Christ -- on the contrary, we invite you to conform to
it." El-Maqoqos then reread the letter of Mohammed. It was conceived thus: "In the name of God
the Compassionate and Merciful, from Mohammed, the Prophet of God, to El-Maqoqos, the lord of
the Copts; greeting be upon all who follow the good path! I invite you to that to which Islam
invites; embrace Islam and you will be saved and God will give you twice your reward. O people
of the Bible, come to us. A single word separates us, here it is: We worship only God and give
him no associates. We choose no other master than God (Koran, III, 57). And if you refuse (to
follow us), at least attest that we are Muslims." And having finished his reading, El-Maqoqos
took the letter and put it in an ivory casket that he sealed.

According to Aban ben Saleh, El-Maqoqos, having with him only an interpreter, sent for Hateb
during the night and said to him: "Will you not answer the questions I shall put to you? I know
that your master did not send you without having chosen you." "To all you ask," said Hateb, "I
will answer frankly." "What then does Mohammed require?" "He asks that you worship God, that you
give him no associates, and that you reject all that is not him; he prescribes also prayer."
"How many times do you pray?" "Five times during the day and night; moreover, we fast during
the month of Ramadan; we must make the pilgrimage to the Kaaba, keep our promises, and abstain
from meat not slaughtered and from blood." "Who are his followers?" "The most valiant of his
people and others besides." "Is his word accepted?" "Yes." "Describe him to me." "I described
him," reports Hateb, "but incompletely." "There are other things you do not speak of," said
El-Maqoqos: "the redness of his eyes, a redness that rarely disappears, and the seal of
prophecy placed between his two shoulders; he rides an ass, clothes himself in a mantle and,
for food, contents himself with dates and a piece of bread, without concerning himself with who
passes near him, whether it be his uncle or his cousin." "That is exact," said Hateb. "I knew,"
resumed El-Maqoqos, "that a prophet

[PDF p. 114]

remained to come, but I thought he would appear in Syria, the country where the prophets who
preceded him appeared. And here he comes out of Arabia, land of affliction and misery. The
Copts will not follow me if I rally to him, and I am anxious that you not divulge our
conversation. He (the Prophet) will conquer the country, and his companions, after his death,
will occupy this land that is ours and will be masters of all that is here. I will not say a
word of all this to the Copts. As for you, return to your master." Then, calling a secretary,
El-Maqoqos had him write in Arabic a letter conceived thus: "To Mohammed, son of Abd Allah,
from El-Maqoqos, prince of the Copts, greeting. I have read your letter and understood its
meaning, as well as the invitation it contains; I knew that a prophet remained to come, but I
thought he would appear in Syria. I have treated your messenger well, and I send you two of
the noblest slaves among the Egyptian women; at the same time, I have a mantle delivered to
you and a mule that will serve you as a mount. Greeting."

According to Abd er-Rahman ben Abd el-Qari, when Hateb presented the Prophet's letter to
Maqoqos, the latter kissed it; then he treated Hateb generously and granted him the widest
hospitality. He sent him back to the Prophet of God, to whom he made a gift of a garment, a
mule with its saddle, and two slaves -- one of whom was the mother of Ibrahim, the other,
given by the Prophet to Gahem ben Qeïs el-Abdari, was the mother of Zakaria ben Gahem, who
succeeded 'Amr ben el-As in the government of Egypt. Others claim that she was given by the
Prophet to Mohammed ben Mouslimat el-Ansari, or to Dahiah ben Khalifat el-Kalbi, or, according
to a last version, to Hassan ben Thabet.

According to Yezid ben Abou Habib, Maqoqos, on receiving the Prophet's letter, pressed it
against his chest and said: "Here is the time when the Prophet announced and described in the
book of God must come. Among the traits that characterize him, we find that he will not take
two sisters either as wives or as concubines; he will receive presents and not alms; he will
choose the poor for his councilors, and the seal of the prophets will be imprinted between his
two shoulders." Then, calling a wise man -- as there were not in Egypt young girls more
beautiful or prettier than Maria and her sister, both originally from the land of Gafn, in the
district of Antinoe -- he sent the two of them to the Prophet, to whom he made a gift in
addition of a gray mule and a gray

[PDF p. 115]

ass, a garment of Egyptian cloth, honey of Benha, and silver for alms. It is said that
Maqoqos gave as a present to the Prophet four slaves -- two according to others -- a mule
named Douldoul, an ass named Yafour, a mantle, a thousand mithqals of gold, twenty garments
of Egyptian cloth, a eunuch named Mabour who, it is said, was the cousin of Maria, a mare
named El-Korrar, a glass cup, and honey of Benha; the Prophet was marveled at it and called
upon him the blessing of God, saying: "The wicked man showed himself miserly with what he
possessed, and nothing of what he possessed will remain to him. El-Maqoqos has said good
things and has treated Hateb ben Abou Balta'at well; he has almost accomplished what he ought
to do, but he has not embraced Islam."

Ibn Sa'd says: Mohammed ben Omar el-Ouaqedi Abou Ya'qoub ben Mohammed ben Abou Sa'sa'at told
me, on the authority of Abd Allah ben Abd er-Rahman ben Abou Sa'sa'at, that El-Maqoqos, lord
of Alexandria, had sent as a present to the Prophet, in the year 7 of the hijra [11 May 628
to 30 April 629], Maria and her sister Sirin, a thousand mithqals of gold, twenty garments,
the mule Douldoul, the ass 'Afira, and the eunuch Mabour. Hateb taught Islam to Maria, who
converted, as did her sister; after them, the eunuch embraced Islam. The man whom Maqoqos had
sent to accompany Maria was named Ibn Abd Allah el-Qobti, freedman of the Beni 'Afar.
El-Maqoqos, according to Ibn Abd el-Hakem, had prescribed to his messenger to see who sat with
the Prophet and to look whether, on his back, there was a large mole covered with hairs, which
the messenger did. And when he arrived before the Prophet, he presented him the two sisters
and the two mounts, the honey and the garments, and told him that all this was the presents of
Maqoqos. The Prophet received the presents, for he had the habit of refusing the gifts of no
one. And, looking at Maria and her sister, they pleased him, but he did not wish to take the
two of them. As they resembled each other, he said: "O my God, choose for your prophet," and
God made him choose Maria in this manner: when the Prophet said to the two of them, "Confess
that there is no god but God and that Mohammed is his servant and his apostle," Maria hastened
to pronounce the confession and believed before her sister, who reflected a moment, then
pronounced the formula [...]

[PDF p. 116]

and believed. The Prophet made a gift of Maria's sister to Moslema Ibn Mohammed el-Ansari --
or, according to others, to Dahiat ben Khalifat el-Kalbi.

Yezid ben Abou Habib recounts, on the authority of Abd er-Rahman ben Shamat el-Mahri, who had
it from Abd Allah ben Omar, that the Prophet, having entered to the mother of Ibrahim, the
Egyptian, mother of his son, found with her a relative who had come with her from Egypt and
who often visited her. Grief fell upon the heart of the Prophet, who, on going out, met Omar
ben el-Khattab. The latter recognized, from the Prophet's face, that there was something; he
questioned him, and the Prophet told him everything. Omar seized his sword, entered to Maria;
the relative was still there. Omar advanced on him with his sword raised, but the latter,
seeing the gesture, lifted his robe; he was a eunuch and had nothing between his legs. At this
sight, Omar returned to the Prophet and told him how it was. The Prophet then said: "Gabriel
came to me and announced that Maria was innocent, as was her relative, and informed me that
she bore in her womb a son of mine who would resemble me, and he ordered me to call him
Ibrahim, and he greeted me by the name of Abou Ibrahim."

Ez-Zaheri, on the authority of Anas, says that, when the mother of Ibrahim brought Ibrahim
into the world, grief fell upon the heart of the Prophet until Gabriel came to him and said:
"Greeting be upon you, O Abou Ibrahim." El-Maqoqos had sent, it is said, with Maria a eunuch
who often went to see her. It is said also that Maqoqos made a gift to the Prophet of several
slaves, of whom one, Maria, was the mother of Ibrahim, the second was given to Abou Gahem ben
Hazifah, and the third to Hassan ben Thabet.

Maria gave the Prophet Ibrahim, the most cherished of men until his death -- a death that
caused the Prophet great grief. On the day of his death, he was sixteen months old.

The mule and the ass [sent by El-Maqoqos] were the favorite mounts of the Prophet. He gave the
mule the name of Douldoul and the ass that of Ya'four. He found the honey delicious and called
the blessing of God on the honey of Benha. He kept the garments, some of which served to bury
him. The name of Maria's sister was Qisar, according to others Sirin, or, according to a third
reading, Hamanah.

El-Hassan ben Aly asked Moawiah ben Abou Safian to exempt from tax

[PDF p. 117]

the inhabitants of the village of the mother of Ibrahim, out of veneration for her. Moawiah
consented to it: they were exempted from the tax, and none of them had any due to pay. All the
people of the village were either relatives or allies of Maria; they are extinct today.

According to the traditions, the Prophet is said to have said: "If Ibrahim had lived, I would
have exempted all the Copts from the tax." Maria died at Medina, in Moharrem of the year 15
[the month of Moharrem of the year 15 runs from 14 February to 14 March 636].

Ibn Ouahb says: Yahia ben Aïoub and Ibn Lahi'at told me, on the authority of Aqil, who had it
from Ez-Zahari, to whom the thing had been told by Ya'qoub ben Abd Allah ben el-Morhirat ben
el-Akhfash, who had it from Ibn Omar, that the Prophet used to say: "Iblis entered Iraq and
did there what he wished; then he entered Syria, where he was pursued until he had taken
refuge in the mountain of Shaq; then he entered Egypt and laid eggs there. His eggs hatched
and his young spread." This is an authentic tradition but little known.

Some authors have disparaged Egypt. All that it has of beauty, they say, comes to it from
outside, even the four elements: the water, brought by the Nile, comes to it from the south;
the earth is carried by the water, without which the soil would be only pure sand producing
nothing; fire? one finds no tree in Egypt fit to maintain it; as for the wind, it blows there
only from the two seas, now from the sea of Roum, now from the sea of Qolzoum. The author, in
this, shows an exaggerated bias.

Ka'ab el-Ahbar said: Mesopotamia will be preserved from ruin as long as Armenia is not
destroyed; Egypt will be preserved from ruin as long as Mesopotamia is not ruined; and
El-Koufa will be preserved from ruin as long as the universal cataclysm has not come.

[PDF p. 118]

CHAPTER X
OF THE MARVELS THAT EXISTED IN EGYPT, IN THE WAY OF TALISMANS, TEMPLES, AND OTHER SUCH THINGS

It is recounted, in the book of the Curious Facts of History and Marvels of Events, that there
was in Egypt a stone such that whoever clenched it in his hands voided everything he had in
his body.

El-Qoda'i says: El-Gahez and others report that the marvels of the world numbered thirty, of
which ten for all countries (other than Egypt), which are: the mosque of Damascus, the church
of Er-Rouha (Edessa), the bridge of Sandjar, the palace of Rhamdan, the church of Rome, the
statue of the Olives, the halls of Chosroes at Modaïn (Ctesiphon), the temple of the Winds at
Palmyra, the two palaces of Khouarneq and Sadir at Herat, and the three stones of Baalbek
which are, it is said, a temple of Jupiter and Venus -- there was there, it is asserted, a
temple for each of the seven planets, but they have been destroyed. The twenty other marvels
belong to Egypt. Of this number are the TWO PYRAMIDS, among the greatest and most astonishing
constructions; there is on the surface of the earth no monument, made by human hand and stone
by stone, greater than they. On seeing them, one would take them for two mountains rising up;
this is what made an author who had seen them say: "There is nothing for which I do not dread
the effect of time, except the two pyramids; as for them, I dread rather their effect upon
time." [Footnote: this somewhat convoluted phrase means simply that time, which wears away all
things, will be worn away by the two pyramids.] -- the STATUE OF THE TWO PYRAMIDS, also called
Balhouiah or Balhit. It is, it is said, a talisman raised against the sands, intended to
prevent them from invading the cultivated lands of Gizeh; -- the TEMPLE OF SAMANHOUD, one of
the most marvelous things of Egypt.

[PDF p. 119]

Abou Amr el-Kandi recounts this: "I visited it at the time when the governor was having the
fruits of the season stored there. At the moment when the camels approached the door with
their loads, all the flies settled on the fruits fell, and none of them entered the temple."
It was destroyed around 350 [20 February 961 to 8 February 962]; -- the TEMPLE OF AKHMIM,
marvel of marvels, full of figures and prodigious things, and presenting the portrait of the
kings who were to reign over Egypt. Dhou'n-Noun el-Akhmimi, who read the berabi (hieroglyphic
writing), noted an extraordinary wisdom in it, and he effaced the greater part of it; -- the
TEMPLE OF DENDERAH, a marvelous temple, pierced with one hundred eighty windows. Each day the
sun entered by one of these windows, the next day by the following one, and so on to the last,
after which it retreated from window to window to its point of departure; -- the WALL OF THE
OLD WOMAN, which extended from El-Arich to Assouan and went around Egypt, from east to west; --
ALEXANDRIA AND ITS MARVELS, among which must be cited the TOWER (lighthouse), the COLUMN, and
the CIRCUS where people gathered on a certain day of the year; then a ball was thrown into the
air, and the one in whose lap it fell was to reign one day over Egypt. Amr ben el-As attended
one of these festivals, and the ball fell into his lap, and indeed he later reigned over the
country in the time of Islam. This circus held a million persons, each of whom could easily
see the faces of the others. If a reading was made, everyone heard it, and if some game was
played, each could follow it with the eyes without having to raise himself on his tier,
whether he was above or below; -- the TWO OBELISKS, which are like two mountains placed on
pedestals of bronze, each angle of the mass resting on a column. One could pass beneath them,
from one side to the other, whatever one wished; -- the TWO COLUMNS OF FATIGUE are two
overturned columns, behind each of which is a mountain of pebbles, similar to the heaps of
stones one throws at Mina. If someone is tired and exhausted, he has only to approach them,
holding in his hand seven pebbles; arrived near one of these columns, he throws the seven
pebbles behind him, rises again without turning around, and returns to his work; whatever
burden he carries, he feels no fatigue at all;

[PDF p. 120]

-- the GREEN CUPOLA, a surprising cupola clad in copper like pure gold, which time cannot
destroy and which the centuries leave intact; -- the PORT OF AQABAH, the PALACE OF FARES, and
the UNDERGROUND CHURCH; this last is like a town raised upon another town, and there is no
town like it on the surface of the earth. It is, it is said, the same as Iram-dhat-el-Amad
(Iram of the Columns), to which this name was given because its columns and its (walls of)
marble are of violet-colored stones (?), alternated with bands in height and in width;
[Footnote: the phrase is difficult to understand; I do not know what two of the terms are.]
-- the MOUNTAINS OF THE SAID that skirt the Nile. These mountains, three in number, bear the
names of mountain of Kahf (or of Kaf), of Tilmoun, and of mountain of Zemagir the sorceress.
In this last is found, it is said, a peak that one sees from the Nile but that no one can
reach. There are writings traced there in your name, O my God; -- the DEFILE OF THE BIRDS,
Bouqir, in the vicinity of Ashmoun, in the Said; it is a crevice in the mountain where there
is a fissure to which, on a certain day of the year, the Bouqirs (cattle egrets) come; they
approach the crack, each bird puts its beak in it then turns back, until the crack closes on
the beak of one of them and holds it prisoner. All escape, and the captive remains suspended
until, dead, it finally falls; -- AÏN-SHAMS (Heliopolis), which is a temple of the Sun. One
sees there those two columns (obelisks) that nothing surpasses nor even equals in marvels.
They rise toward the sky to a height of about fifty cubits; they rest on the ground, and one
sees represented on them figures on mounts. At their summit are cones of copper, from the
point of which, when the Nile rises, water falls drop by drop; one easily ascertains this on
examining it. The water flows thus to the foot of these columns, where jujube trees and other
plants grow. When the sun is at the initial point of the Capricorn, the time of year when the
day is shortest, that body reaches the more southerly of the two columns and appears above its
summit; [when the sun is at the initial point of the Crab, the time of year when the day is
longest, that body reaches the more northerly of these two columns and appears above its
summit;] [Footnote: I have added the bracketed clause from the description of Aïn-Shams.] they
are the two extreme points of the two declinations, and the equinoctial line passes between
the two and [...]

[PDF p. 121]

then the sun moves between them, both going and returning, throughout the whole year. This at
least is what is said by the people who occupy themselves with this kind of science; --
MEMPHIS, ITS MARVELS, its statues, its monuments, its hypogea, its treasures; one finds there
an incalculable number of vestiges of kings, sages, and prophets. This cannot be denied; --
FARMA, richer still in marvels and monuments; -- the FAYOUM; -- the NILE; -- the stone known
by the name of the STONE OF VINEGAR, which remains at the surface of that liquid and moves in
it like a fish. One finds also in Egypt a stone such that whoever presses it in his hands
voids all he has in his body. One also met with a pearl that women wore at the hip so as not
to become pregnant, and a stone which, placed at the door of an oven, made the bread fall out
of it. In the Said were found soft, brittle stones that one kindled like torches. -- There was
also, among other marvels, a STONE VAT, into which one and even four persons could climb who,
agitating the water with some instrument, passed from one bank of the river to the other. No
one knows who had made it. Kafour el-Ikhshidi had it transported to Masr, examined it, and had
it drawn out of the water. It was placed on the shore, and writings were seen traced in its
bottom that no one could understand. The virtue of the vat ceased from then on. Another of the
marvels of Egypt was an acacia found in a village of the Said named Dechneh. If one threatened
to cut it, this tree withered, shrank, and curled up; if one said to it, "We spare you and let
you live," it returned to life. What is true is that one still finds at present in the Said an
acacia which, if one puts the hand on it, withers, and, if one withdraws it, revives. It was
brought to Cairo, and, after examination, it was recognized that its wood goes to the bottom
of the water like ebony. In Egypt one also meets the acacia, which furnishes a wood used to
heat great cauldrons for a long time. This wood leaves no ashes. -- Ibn Naser el-Masri reports
that there was, at the gate of the great palace called the Gate of the Basil, near the
suspended church, a bronze statue representing a camel, mounted by a man wearing a turban,
holding under his arm an Arab bow and shod in babouches. The Greeks, the Copts, and the other
people of the country, if they did themselves some wrong or some injury, would approach this
statue and, holding themselves between the camel's feet, the offended party would say to the
offender: "Render me justice before

[PDF p. 122]

the man with the camel makes you render it willy-nilly." This rider was none other than the
prophet Mohammed. When 'Amr ben el-As came to Egypt, the Greeks destroyed this camel for fear
it would testify against them. Ibn Lahiat says: "I was told that this statue remained a number
of years in the same place without anyone knowing who had made it."

Such are, says El-Qodaï, the twenty marvels of Egypt, several of which are even the union of a
great number of marvels; and, if one had to enumerate them one by one, the number would become
immense. It is said that there is in no country a thing so marvelous that there is not found in
Egypt something similar or approaching it. And moreover, Egypt surpasses other countries by the
marvels peculiar to it, which are not met with elsewhere.

According to the book entitled Gifts of the Hearts, there was in Egypt an underground chamber
where Christian monks lived. In this chamber was a wooden bed, beneath which lay the body of a
dead child, wrapped in leather and bound with cords. On the bed was placed a kind of jar
traversed by a copper tube fitted with a wick. When the wick was lit, and as long as it gave
light, there came out of the tube a pure, delicious, and excellent oil that filled the jar and,
by its very abundance, extinguished the wick. As soon as the wick was out, nothing more came
out of the tube, and if one withdrew the body of the child from under the bed, the oil ceased
to flow. This jar was examined without finding anything beneath it, not even the smallest hole.
The monks lived on this oil, which people bought for their use.

Master Ibrahim ben Ouasif Shah recounts that the king 'Adim, son of Naqtarim, was a violent and
proud prince, of high stature; it was he who ordered the rocks to be cut to make pyramids of
them, as the ancients had done. In his time lived the two angels driven from heaven, who
inhabited the well of Aftarah; these two angels taught the Egyptians magic, and it is claimed
that Adim, son of El-Budchir, learned most of their sciences; after which the two angels went
to Babel. The Egyptians, the Copts especially, assert that these were two demons named Mahla
and Bahala, and not the two angels; that the two angels are at Babel in a well, where the
sorcerers gather, and that they will remain there until the day of judgment. It is since that
time that idols are worshiped; it is Satan, it is said, who made them known to men and raised
them for them;

[PDF p. 123]

according to others, the first to raise idols was Badoura, and the first idol erected was that
of the Sun; others, finally, claim that the first Nimrod ordered the kings to raise the idols
and worship them. It was also, it is said, 'Adim who first made use of the punishment of the
cross, on this occasion: a woman married to a personage of the court had adulterous relations
with a man of the artisan class. The king had them crucified on two posts, the back of one of
the guilty facing the back of the other. And there was written on each post the name of the
guilty, their crime, and the date of the punishment. From then on, adultery ceased. This king
built four cities where all sorts of marvelous objects and talismans were deposited; he buried
there considerable treasures. In the east, he raised a tower at the summit of which was placed
a statue turned toward the rising sun, the two hands extended to prevent the animals of the
sea and of the desert from passing its limit; on its chest was engraved the date of its
erection. This statue is, it is said, still standing to the present; had it disappeared, the
waters of the eastern sea would have invaded the land of Egypt. The same king also had a bridge
thrown over the Nile, at the point where Nubia begins; on this bridge, he raised four statues
turned toward the four cardinal points; each of them was armed with two javelins to strike
those who would advance toward its side. These statues remained standing until the day they
were destroyed by the Pharaoh of Moses. This king also had raised, at the gate of Nubia, a
temple that has remained standing to our days. He also had cut, in one of the four cities of
which we have just spoken, a vat of black granite, filled with water, which never throughout
the course of time diminished or spoiled, for the builder had brought into it the humidity of
the air; the people of the region as well as the inhabitants of the city drank of this water
without its diminishing. The king had had this vat made because the city was very far from the
Nile. Some Coptic priests hold that this water remained thus persistent because of the
proximity of the sea, whose mists the heat of the sun pumped up, which, whether by mechanical
means or by magic, were resolved partly into water that was brought to this vat, by means of
elements such as coolness, or by using the force of the wind; in any case, despite time, this
water did not diminish, however much the people might drink of it. This king also had made a
pretty cup that enjoyed the same properties, and that Houamel offered to king Alexander the
Great. 'Adim

[PDF p. 124]

reigned over the Egyptians for one hundred forty years, and died at the age of seven hundred
thirty years. He was buried in one of his marvelous cities or, according to others, in the
desert of Qoft.

Certain Copts recount that the tomb of 'Adim had been built in the desert of Qoft at the
surface of the ground, under a cupola of brilliant green glass, at the summit of which was
placed a ball of gold surmounted by a bird of gold inlaid with gems, with outspread wings,
charged with defending the entrance of the cupola. The dimensions of the monument were a
hundred cubits square. In the middle, the body of the king was deposited, the face uncovered,
on a bed of plaited gold, and there were spread over him garments of woven gold interwoven with
gems arranged with art. The height of the cupola was forty cubits; there were deposited inside
one hundred seventy manuscripts of scientific works, and seven tables with their service: a
table of pearls of pomegranate-red color with a similar service; a table of gold of Qlimoun,
with a service of the same metal; a table of brilliant sun-stone with its service (this stone
is the emerald that makes the eyes of vipers that look at it run); a table of worked red sulfur,
with its service; a table of worked, shining white salt, with its service; and a table of solid
mercury. There were also enclosed in the cupola numerous gems, vessels of magnificent
workmanship and, around the body, seven swords and cuirasses of iron of a brilliant white and
beautiful workmanship, statues of horses in gold harnessed with saddles of gold, and seven gold
sarcophagi of dinars on which was figured the image of the king; there were also deposited with
him all sorts of drugs, poisons, and medicines enclosed in vessels of stone. People who have
seen this mausoleum claim to have remained days and days without being able to reach it, and
that finally, having approached it to a distance of eight cubits, the cupola began to turn right
and left; and, among other marvelous facts, they recounted that passing from vault to vault,
they never saw any image other than the one they had seen from the preceding vault; they said
also that they had seen the face of the king a cubit and a half long, and his beard very long
and uncovered; they measured the length of his body, which reached ten cubits and more. These
people who saw the mausoleum say that, having gone out for some work, they had discovered it by
chance, that they had questioned the people of Qoft about it, and that only one old man had been
able to answer them.

[PDF p. 125]

The king 'Adim recommended to his son Shedab ben 'Adim to raise in each province of his empire a
column on which he would write his name. Shedab therefore went to Ashmounein, erected a column
there, and inscribed his name on it. He also built circuses there, and in the desert of
Ashmounein he raised a tower surmounted by a two-headed statue dedicated to the two planets that
were in conjunction at the time of its erection. From there he went to Athrib and built there a
magnificent cupola raised on columns and pillars set one above the other; at the summit of the
cupola was placed a small statue of gold; he built besides a temple to the planets and set out
for the district of Sa. There he raised a tower surmounted by a mirror made of mixed substances
in which one could see each province, then he departed. Shedab ben 'Adim also built the temple
of Erment in which were erected statues in the name of the planets and made of all sorts of
metals; this temple was magnificently decorated: it was inlaid with gems and colored glass,
hung with silk and brocade. In the towns of the interior, starting from Antinoe, he built a
temple and constructed another at Athribis, his residence; it was he again who raised the
temple situated east of Alexandria. He also raised a statue of black granite on the western
bank of the Nile, and on the eastern bank he built several cities: in one of them was a standing
statue representing a man with his penis: if some impotent or bewitched man, incapable of
performing the virile act, approached it and rubbed it with his hand, his virility reappeared
and he could accomplish coitus. In another of these cities was the image of a cow with enormous
udders: if a woman's milk dried up, she had only to approach the cow and rub it with her two
hands for her milk to reappear. The same king also made, in the district of Assiout, a talisman
to attract the crocodiles; these animals came in throngs by the Nile as far as Akhmim, where
they were killed, and from their skins boats and other utensils were made.

The king Menqaous built a house surrounded by statues assigned to all the infirmities. On the
head of each of them, he wrote the name of the disease it cured. People used them for a long
time, until the day when a certain king overturned them. He also made the statue of a woman with
a smiling face that an afflicted person could not look at without being delivered from his grief
and his pain. People approached her one after another, went around her, [...]

[PDF p. 126]

worshiping it, and this statue became one of the divinities they honored thereafter. He also
raised another statue of gilded bronze, fitted with two wings, near which neither male nor
female fornicators could pass without showing their nakedness; it was by means of this statue
that adulterers were discovered, and this crime was no longer committed, for fear of the
statue. Under the reign of Kalkoun, one of the women of this prince was seized with desire for
one of his servants, but she feared being discovered by the statue. So, one day, conversing
with the king, she brought the conversation around to adulteries, overwhelming them with
invectives and sarcasms. Kalkoun then spoke to her of the statue and its virtue. "The king
speaks truly," answered the queen, "but Menqaous was not very wise, for he took, along with his
sages, much trouble for the well-being of his people, and not for his own. It would have been
better had he erected the statue in the royal palace, there where his women and slaves are, and
if any of them had committed adultery, it would have been known, and the apprehension of this
statue would have been a curb to the desires that might have fallen into their hearts." "You
are right," said Kalkoun, who believed the queen's advice sincere; and he had the statue
removed from the place it occupied to transport it to his palace; but it lost its virtue and
the woman accomplished her desire.

The same Menqaous also had built on the mountain of Qoçeïr a temple where magicians resided
who did not permit the winds to favor the passage of ships until the latter had paid the tax
the magicians levied on them on the king's account.

Menaous, son of Menqaous, built in the western desert a city, near the city of the magicians;
it was called Qantarat and was filled with marvels. In the middle of the city, the king had
raised a cupola above which was a kind of cloud that let fall, summer as in winter, a light
rain; beneath the cupola was a reservoir filled with a green water that served to treat and
cure all diseases. In the east, he built a superb temple fitted with four double-leaved doors.
On each leaf was represented a head that conversed with its neighbor about the events of the
day. On whoever entered this temple in a state of impurity the two faces of the door blew, and
the impure one was seized with a violent trembling that left him only when he fell dead. It is
recounted that in the middle of this temple light descended in the form of a column, and
whoever

[PDF p. 127]

managed to embrace it could distinctly perceive the spirits, hear their words, and see their
actions. At each of the gates of this city was the statue of a monk holding in his hands a
manual treating of some one of the sciences. Those who wished to know that science had only to
approach the monk and rub the book with his two hands, which he then passed over his chest; at
that instant this science fixed itself in his breast. These two cities were, it is said, built
in the name of Hermes, who is the same as Mercury, and still subsist in the same state. -- It
is recounted that a man came one day to Abd el-Aziz ben Merwan, emir of Egypt, and informed him
that, having lost his way in the eastern desert, he had come upon a ruined city where there was
a tree producing all sorts of fruits, that he had eaten of them and gathered a provision of
them. A Copt assured him that it was one of the two cities of Hermes and that there must be
considerable treasures there. Abd el-Aziz sent the man with an escort and provisions of water
and food, but they beat the desert for months without finding traces of the city.

The mother of king Milatus had dug in the western desert an immense basin in the middle of
which rose a column thirty cubits high surmounted by a stone bowl from which water flowed
constantly; around this basin were placed images of stones of various colors representing
animals -- wild and domestic beasts, birds; and every animal that approached the image
representing it remained attached to it in such a way that one could take it with the hand and
make use of it. -- She also had built for her son a pavilion. This prince was very fond of the
chase. The queen put in this pavilion seats raised on pedestals of marble plated with gold and
inlaid with gems and enamels. The pavilion was entirely adorned with marvelous designs and
engravings. Water escaped from gushing springs and flowed through canals paved with silver
toward gardens adorned with magnificent furnishings. Around the pavilion were ranged statues
that whistled in all sorts of languages, and before the seats were hung curtains of brocade.
The queen chose for her son his most beautiful cousins and the most beautiful princesses; she
married him and installed him in this garden, around which were seats for the viziers, the
priests, and the chiefs of the artisans, who came to render him account of all their acts;

[PDF p. 128]

the report finished, food and drink were served to them. Milatus, having become king at the
death of his father Marqouah, was still only a child, and the kingdom was directed by his
mother, a judicious and prudent woman, who conducted affairs as in the time of Milatus's
father, in an admirable way, treating her subjects with justice and relieving them of several
taxes. His whole reign was happy; he spread abundance and happiness among men, as well as
justice.

Milatus had one day devoted to the chase; when he returned, he had presents distributed to his
companions and had food and drink served to them. The other days, he spent one sitting,
examining the situation of his subjects and providing for their needs, and the next he spent
with his women. He reigned thirteen years and died of smallpox.

Farsoun ben Qjlmoun ben Athrib raised at the edge of the sea of Qolzoum a tower surmounted by a
mirror that drew ships to the shore and did not let them leave unless they paid the tithe; the
tithe paid, the mirror was veiled until the ships had passed. Farsoun reigned two hundred sixty
years and had built for himself a tomb behind the black mountain of the East; at the center was
a cupola surrounded by twelve chapels containing marvels all different from one another, and
there was inscribed on this cupola the name of the king and the duration of his reign.

The king Marqonos was a sage, a friend of astronomy, science, and philosophy. In his time a
singular dirhem was struck; if the owner of this dirhem wished to buy something, he agreed with
the merchant to weigh the merchandise bought simply at the weight of the dirhem, without
demanding anything more. Seduced by this proposition, the merchant accepted, and the bargain
concluded, the dirhem came to weigh a number of rotls equal to ten times double its weight, and
even twice that number of rotls if the owner of the dirhem desired it. This dirhem was found in
the treasury of the people of that age, and later in the treasury of the Omayyads. Other
dirhems were found, struck, it is said, under the same reign: if, wishing to buy something, one
placed this dirhem in the scale of some merchant, one had only to kiss it, saying: "Remember the
agreement," and one bought what one wished; returned home with the merchandise bought, the buyer
found his dirhem again, which had preceded him to his dwelling; as for the merchant, he no longer
found in the place

[PDF p. 129]

of this dirhem anything but a myrtle leaf, a piece of paper, or some other thing round like the
dirhem. It is from the time of this king also that the glass vessels were made that served as
weights; filled with water or some other thing, they weighed no more than empty. In his time
also were made those vessels that transformed water into true wine in color, perfume, and effect.
One of these vessels was found at Alfih during the vizierate of Haroun ben Khamarawiah ben Ahmed
ben Touloun; they were goblets of onyx closed with a blue stopper streaked with white. Those who
found it were Abou-l-Hasan the jeweler, of Khorassan, and his companions. As they were eating on
the bank of the Nile, they drank water from this goblet and found it to be wine; they got drunk
and began to dance; the goblet fell and broke into pieces. Abd el-Hasan was very grieved and went
to Haroun with the pieces of the vessel. Haroun, much afflicted, cried: "Had this goblet been
intact, I would have paid for it a part of my kingdom!" As for the copper vessels that changed
water into wine, they are attributed to Cleopatra, daughter of Ptolemy, queen of Alexandria;
these are numerous. It is from the time of Marqonos that the images of reptiles, toads, beetles,
flies, scorpions, and other insects were made. If one put in any place one of these images, all
those of its species gathered there and could no longer separate from the image, and they were
easily killed. This king seems to have regulated himself, in all he did, by the celestial
constellations, according to their names and their appearance, and in this way he accomplished
all he desired. He also established in the western desert a circus of colored glass, in the
middle of which was a cupola of transparent green glass. When the sun was above this cupola, the
rays were sent back to a great distance. On the four sides of the circus he installed four high
seats of glass, each of them of a different color, and on each seat were traced in glass, of a
color different from the ground, marvelous magic formulas, strange designs, and extraordinary
figures, all in limpid and transparent glass. The king spent whole days in this circus and
established three festivals there per year. At each festival the people came running, made
sacrifices, and remained seven days; and they came willingly, for this circus had no equal, no
similar circus existed in the universe; it was finally destroyed by a king furious at not being
able to make a similar one.

[PDF p. 130]

The mother of Marqounos was the daughter of the king of Nubia; her father worshiped the star
Souha, to which he gave the name of god; she asked her son to build her a particular temple. He
built it, plated it with gold and silver, and installed there an idol veiled by a curtain of
silk; the queen entered it with her slaves and her suite and prostrated herself before the idol
three times a day; she instituted a monthly festival in which victims were slaughtered and
incense was burned before the statue night and day; she enthroned a Nubian priest charged with
watching over the idol, making the sacrifices, and burning the perfumes; and she gave her son no
rest until he in turn worshiped the idol and invited (his people) to worship it. When the priest
saw that the king professed a perfect cult for the star, he wished to give the star Souha
representatives on the earth in the form of an animal that would be worshiped. For this he acted
by cunning, and waited until, by chance, the vultures, having multiplied in Egypt, caused great
damage to the people. The king summoned this priest and asked him the cause of the increase of
the vultures. "It is," said the priest, "your god who has sent them, so that you may make in
their image a statue that will be worshiped." "If that is to satisfy the God, I will do it," said
the king. "The God will be satisfied," said the priest. The king therefore had made a vulture
two cubits high and a cubit wide, of cast gold; its eyes were two rubies; two necklaces of pearls
fitted on tubes of green stone were put around its neck, and a pearl suspended at its beak; its
thighs were adorned with red pearls. It was placed on a pedestal of chased silver, itself set on
a support of blue glass, and it was installed under a vault to the right of the temple; before it
was hung a curtain of silk; it was prescribed to burn for it aromatics and odoriferous gums, and
there were consecrated to it a black calf, the firstborn of the chicks, and the first of the
fruits and flowers. After seven days, the king invited the people to come worship the idol, and
the people came running. The priest, ever preoccupied with the cult of this statue, had a festival
instituted for it. Forty days later, the devil spoke through the mouth of the idol. The first
thing it asked was that sandalwood be burned for it at each middle of the month, and that the
temple be sprinkled with old wine taken from the surface of the jars; moreover, it announced to
the people that it was it who had driven away the vultures and made the harm they caused cease,
and that in the future it would preserve them from all they had to fear. The priest, delighted,
went to find the king's mother to inform her of what was happening; she went to the [...]

[PDF p. 131]

temple, heard the words of the vulture and, all joyful, worshiped it. The king, informed in
turn, went on horseback to the temple; the statue conversed with him, prescribing certain
things to him and forbidding him others. The king worshiped it, gave it servants, and had the
temple decorated with the finest ornaments. And Marqounos remained in the temple worshiping the
statue and questioning it about what he should do, and the statue answered him.

In the matter of chemistry, he did what no king until then had yet done; it is said that he
buried in the western desert five hundred treasures. It is said also that he raised at the
gate of the city of Sa a column surmounted by a statue representing a woman seated and holding
a mirror in which she looked. If a sick person came to her and looked into this mirror, or if
someone looked for him, if he was to die of that disease, he was seen dead; if he was to live,
he was seen living. Likewise for a traveler: if he was seen from the front, it was known that
he would return; if he was seen from the back, it was known that he would linger on the road.
Was he sick or dead, he was seen such in the mirror. He also made at Alexandria the image of a
monk seated on a seat, the head covered with a kind of burnous and holding a staff in his hand.
If some merchant passed near him, he had to deposit in his hands a part of his money
proportioned to his merchandise; if he wished to pass, even far from the statue, without
handing it money, he could not do so and remained there fixed to the spot. By this means
considerable sums were gathered, which were distributed among the incurable, the infirm, and
the poor. There were executed, in his time, all sorts of marvelous things on which he had his
name engraved; it was inscribed also on all the scientific objects, on the talismans and the
statues. He had made for himself an underground tomb near the mountain of Sedam; this tomb was
vaulted, and the vault was, it is said, a hundred cubits long, thirty cubits high, and twenty
wide. It was paved with marble and colored enamels, and the ceiling was made of stones. All
around were ranged benches of glass on each of which was placed a marvelous object. In the
middle of the vault was a gallery of glass, at the four corners of which rose an image charged
with preventing people from approaching; between each two statues was a column surmounted by a
luminous stone, and in the middle of the gallery was placed a vat of gold in which was
deposited the body of the king, after he had been embalmed with all sorts of preservative
aromatics; there were enclosed

[PDF p. 132]

with him all his treasures -- gold, gems, and the rest -- and the door of the corridor was
closed with rocks and lead, over which sand was spread; he had reigned seventy-three years and
was two hundred forty years old. He was handsome, his hair was magnificent; after his death,
his women led a life full of piety and guarded the temple.

After him reigned Aïsad, then Sa, son of Aïsad (some claim that Sa was the son of Marqounous,
brother of Aïsad). This prince had built in the city of Memphis a mirror in which one saw the
times when Egypt was to be either prosperous or barren; he raised, in the interior of the
oases, a city and erected near the sea numerous towers; he also raised, behind the Moqattam, a
statue called the statue of Cunning; whoever had an entangled affair came to this statue,
burned incense to it, and his affair was found cleared up. By his orders was built, on the
shore of the sea, a tower from which one could recognize the state of the sea and know what was
happening there as far as the gaze reached -- that is, at a distance of several days' march --
and he was the first to make use of it. It was he, it is said, who built the greater part of
the city of Memphis and all the important constructions of Alexandria.

When Badares ben Sa took the government of the states of his father and his royalty was well
established in Egypt, he built, to the west of Memphis, an admirable temple to the planet
Venus; in this temple he raised a magnificent statue of gilded lapis lazuli, bearing a crown
of bluish gold, and enclosed it between two walls of green emerald. The statue represented a
woman with two tresses of worked black gold; at her legs were two rings of transparent red
stone, at her feet sandals of gold, and in her hand a scepter of coral. She moved her fingers
as if to greet those who were in the temple. Facing this statue was erected a second
representing a cow with two horns and two udders of gilded red bronze and a necklace of lapis.
The face of the cow was turned toward the face of Venus, and between the two statues, on a
pillar of onyx, was placed a basin made of a mixture of all sorts of stones and containing a
prepared water that cured all diseases. The temple was strewn with herb of Venus, renewed every
seven days; there were arranged for the priests seats plated with gold and silver, and there
were sacrificed to this idol a thousand heads of ewes, goats, wild beasts, and

[PDF p. 133]

birds. On the day of Venus, the king went around the temple, which he had furnished and hung
with curtains. He also had placed there, under a cupola, the image of a man mounted on a winged
mare and holding in his hand a javelin from whose point hung a human head. This temple lasted
until it was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, in the time of Maliq ben Tedares. This prince was a
monotheist according to the religion of Qobtim and Misraïm. He set out with a numerous army, by
land and sea, and made war against the Berbers, Africa, Spain, the land of the Franks, as far
as the Ocean; there he raised towers on which he engraved his name and the account of his
campaign; then he returned, dreaded by the kings of the earth.

To the west of Egypt was a city named Qarmidah whose inhabitants had for queen a sorceress;
Maliq made war on them but without success and returned to Egypt. The queen of Qarmidah wished
to destroy Egypt and, calling magic to her aid, she had fabricated (a talisman) that was thrown
into the Nile. The water swelled and flooded the crops, which perished; the crocodiles teemed,
as did the toads; diseases spread among the Egyptians, and the serpents and scorpions
multiplied. Maliq gathered the priests and sages in the palace of their sessions and engaged
them to occupy themselves with this affair. They therefore looked into their stars and saw that
this spell came to them from the west, that a woman was its author, and that it had been thrown
into the Nile; they knew from then on whence this spell came and applied themselves to repel it
by their own science, so that they got rid of the corrupted water and destroyed the dangerous
beasts. A general was sent with an army against this city, but only a single man was found
there; an incalculable number of riches, gems, and statues were seized -- among others the
statue of a priest, made of green emerald set on a pedestal of stone, and the figure of a genie,
in gold, whose head was of a red stone and the two wings of pearls, and which held in its hand
a volume containing a great part of the sciences of this people; the two boards of this book
were inlaid with gems; there was taken, besides, a basin of sapphire on a pedestal of green
enamel, in which was a water that drove away diseases; finally a mare of silver which, if
someone pronounced over it a certain formula and, after having burned for it certain perfumes,
mounted its back, flew off with its rider. There were brought to Egypt all

[PDF p. 134]

these objects and many other marvelous things and other magical works such as statues,
treasures, gems, and at the same time was brought the man (taken prisoner in the city). The king
asked him what was the most marvelous thing they had done. "One day," he said, "a king of the
Berbers, dragging after him an immense army and frightful engines, attacked us. The people of
the city closed their fortresses and went to pray to the idols. The high priest went to a great,
very deep pond, where the inhabitants quenched their thirst, and, having sat on the shore,
ordered the priests to place themselves around the basin; then he began to murmur over the
water, which began to bubble, and from the middle of the lake came out a fire, in the center of
which appeared a figure similar to the disk of the sun and all luminous. The assembly fell
prostrate before this apparition, which continued to grow until it had passed the cupola, and it
was heard to say: 'You are safe from the harm (your enemies wished to do you).' They rose, and
the enemies were dead, as were all those who accompanied them. And this because the image of
the sun, come out of the basin, had passed by, uttering a cry that had made them perish."

Kalkoun reigned over Egypt after the death of his father Khariba. It is in his time that Nimrod
lived, who, having heard of the wisdom and magical power of Kalkoun, asked this prince
permission to pay him a visit, begging him to come to meet him. Nimrod then inhabited the
countryside of Iraq and had subjugated a great number of peoples. Kalkoun went to meet him,
borne by four winged steeds, surrounded by a kind of fire and ringed with frightful images. He
was in their midst, wearing slung across him a serpent whose extremity served him as a belt;
this serpent had its mouth open. Kalkoun held in his hand a wand of green myrtle and, each time
the serpent agitated its head, he struck it with his wand. Nimrod, when he saw him, was seized
with terror and recognized the greatness of his wisdom. The Copts claim that Kalkoun rose into
the air and sat at the summit of the western pyramid, under a canopy arranged above his head. If
there befell the people of the country some painful affair, they gathered around the pyramid.
It is recounted also that he remained for days at the summit of the pyramid without drinking or
eating, and that once he disappeared for a certain time, so that he was believed dead; the kings
then had a desire to take Egypt, and one of them, a king of the West,

[PDF p. 135]

named Sadoum, attacked it with a numerous army and arrived as far as Ouadi-Haïbab. Kalkoun went
to meet the aggressors, spread by magic above their heads a cloud charged with a stifling heat,
and they remained for days under this cloud without knowing which way to go. Kalkoun then rose
into the air and went to Egypt to inform the Egyptians of what he had done; on his orders, they
went out and found the army destroyed, men and mounts. All the priests dreaded him, and they
engraved his image in all the temples. This king raised to Saturn a temple of black granite, in
the western province, and instituted a festival for it.

In the time of Darem ben er-Raian, who is the fourth pharaoh, named by the Copts Drimous, a
silver mine was discovered three days' march from the Nile; a considerable quantity of metal was
drawn from it. This prince had a statue executed in the name of the Moon, for he was born at the
moment when this planet was in conjunction with the Crab, and he raised it above the alabaster
palace his father had built in the eastern desert; around it he raised statues, all of silver,
which he clothed in red silk, and instituted for it a festival celebrated each time the Moon
entered the sign of the Crab.

When Aksaïs, the sixth pharaoh, took power after his father Mo'dan ben Mo'adious ben Darem ben
Drimous, he had erected around Memphis numerous towers; above these towers were raised columns
from one of which to another one could go; he also made at Raqoudah, at Sa, and in the towns of
Upper and Lower Egypt constructions and towers that were illuminated, and a host of talismans;
he fabricated a block of silver on which was engraved the image of the planets; this block,
plated with porcelain, was placed atop a column in the middle of Memphis; he raised in his
father's temple a statue of Saturn in worked black gold. It is from his time that the balance
intended to counsel men was fabricated: its two pans were of gold, the beam of silver, and the
chains of gold; it was suspended in the temple of the Sun, and on one of the pans was engraved
the word "truth," and on the other the word "falsehood"; below were placed stones bearing the
name of the planets. Was there a dispute between two persons, the offender and the offended
entered the [...]
   ---
   [Footnote: the Arab historians call Pharaohs the kings we name the Shepherds (Hyksos); they
count seven of them and give them an Arab origin. See El-Aïas.]

[PDF p. 136]

temple, each took a stone and pronounced over it some words, then placed one of them in one of
the pans of the balance and the other in the other; the pan of the offender sank and that of
the offended rose. Did a man wish to undertake a journey, he took two stones, giving one the
name of "departure" and the other that of "stay," and placed each of them in a pan. If the two
pans sank, neither rising above the other, he stayed; if both rose, he departed; and if only
one pan rose, he delayed his journey but ended by departing. This balance was likewise consulted
for a debt, for absent persons, and to know whether an affair was good or bad. -- Bokht-Nasr
(Nebuchadnezzar), it is said, among other objects he took to Babylon after the conquest of
Egypt, carried off this balance, which he placed in one of the temples of fire. During the reign
of Aksaïs there was also fabricated an oven that roasted and cooked without fire, and a knife
which, set in place, attracted the animals that saw it, which came to slaughter themselves on it
of their own accord; this prince also prepared a water that transformed itself into fire, and a
glass that changed itself into air, and many other magical objects; he even left the necessary
prescriptions for fabricating them.

As for the temples, it was Sourid, the builder of the pyramids, who, according to Ibn Ouasif
Shah, raised them all, deposited treasures in them, wrote in them the precepts of science, and
established a genie charged with protecting them against whoever would wish to destroy them. In
the book of El-Fihrist it is said that one finds in Egypt constructions named Berabi (temples)
built of stones of an extraordinary size. These Berabi are of different forms. One sees there
chambers for grinding, others for pounding, for condensing, for disaggregating, for filtering --
which proves that they were intended for the practices of chemistry. In these monuments are seen
engravings and unknown writings, and there have been found buried there formulas of science
traced on sheets of gold and silver, and on stone. According to El-Hassan ben Ahmed el-Hamdani,
the construction of the Berabi is attributed to Berab ben Darmesil ben Nahouil ben Khanoukh ben
Qâr ben Adam.

Abou-r-Rihan Mohammed ben Ahmed el-Birouni, in his book entitled Vestiges of the Past Centuries,
reports that in a village of Egypt is a church, visited by trustworthy people whose opinions
prevail

[PDF p. 137]

and on whose accounts one relies. This church possesses an underground chamber reached by a
staircase of twenty-odd steps; in this chamber is seen a bed beneath which lie the bodies of a
man and a child wrapped in leather. On the bed is placed a bull of marble, in the interior of
which is a glass jar into which penetrates a copper tube fitted with a wick of flax. When this
wick is lit, there escapes from the tube an oil that flows into the jar and that does not cease
to flow until the jar is filled and the oil spreads into the bull. This oil serves for the
upkeep of the church and its lighting. El-Gahan recounts that a trustworthy man, having gone to
visit this place, withdrew the jar from the bull, emptied the oil the jar and the bull
contained, extinguished the light, and put everything back in place with the exception of the
oil, which he replaced with oil he had brought; he likewise changed the wick and lit it; the oil
began to flow and did not cease until the jar was full and began to overflow into the bull; yet
he had done nothing other (than what we have said) and had added no substance. The same author
claims that if one removes the dead body from beneath the bed, the light goes out and the oil
flows no more. The people of the village (where this church is) assert that if a woman has
doubts about her pregnancy, to make sure of it she takes the child (lying dead beneath the bed)
in her arms; if she is really pregnant, her child stirs in her womb; if she feels no movement,
she must renounce her idea.

The author adds: Daoud ben Razaq Allah ben Abdallah, who had traveled much in the provinces of
Egypt and knew them thoroughly, told me that, having entered one day a great grotto, situated in
the Said and named the grotto of Sheqalqil, he saw there an enormous heap of sandarac, which he
passed to penetrate further into the grotto. There he perceived an extraordinary quantity of
fish, all wrapped in cloths as if they had been buried after their death. He took one, examined
it, and found in its mouth a dinar covered with a writing he could not well read. He took all the
fish one after another, withdrew a dinar from the mouth of each of them, and gathered a
considerable quantity. Taking the dinars, then, he headed toward the entrance of the grotto to
get out again, but, arrived at the heap of sandarac, he found it so grown that it obstructed the
passage. He returned to the fish, put the dinars back

[PDF p. 138]

in their place, and came back to the heap of sandarac, which had resumed its primitive
proportions and left the passage free. He therefore went out, then re-entered, took up the
dinars again, and wished once more to carry them off, but the sandarac had swelled and closed
the passage. Returning to the fish, he put the dinars back in place and came back; the sandarac
had resumed its first proportions, the passage was free, and he departed. He renewed the
experiment several times, taking the dinars and replacing them, and it was always the same; in
the end, fearing to perish there, he left them and went away. Some time after that, having taken
a house in this place, he saw in a wall a hollow stone on which another stone was placed. He
removed the latter and found beneath it six dinars similar to those he had seen in the mouths of
the fish. He took one, left the rest, and put back over them the stone he had removed. One day,
by the will of God, he embarked on the Nile to pass from the right bank to the left bank. "When
we were in the middle of the river," he recounted, "the fish began to leap out of the water into
the boat in such great number that we were on the point of sinking. The passengers cried out for
fear of death. I then thought of the dinar I had on me and supposed it might well be the cause
of this adventure. I drew it from my pocket and threw it into the water. At once the fish leaped
from the boat into the river, and soon there remained not a single one." -- A man in whom I have
full confidence told me, the author, that he had found a similar talisman and that he had it at
his home. He wished to show me the fish leaping out of the water, but God did not permit me to
see this prodigy.

Ibn Abd el-Hakam recounts that, after God had made the family of Pharaoh perish in the waters,
there remained in Egypt no one of the aristocracy; there were there only slaves, salaried
people, and women, and the women of Egypt, having wished to choose themselves a king, their
votes united on one of them, named Dalukah, daughter of Zeba, an intelligent, instructed, wise
person, of high birth, who was then a hundred sixty years old; she was therefore named queen.
Dalukah, fearing the attacks of the neighboring kings, gathered the noble women and said to
them: "Until now our country has been coveted by no one, and no one has cast on it looks of envy.
But our nobles and our great ones have perished, the magicians have disappeared -- they who made
us strong. I have therefore resolved to raise a rampart around our country; I will place there
on all sides garrisons, and we will no longer have to fear being attacked." She therefore built
a wall surrounding all the land of Egypt with its cultivated lands, its towns, and its villages.
At the foot of this wall was dug a canal filled with running water, over which bridges were
thrown and into which other canals emptied; on this wall, every three miles, she installed
garrisons and guards. In the intervals, and from mile to mile, was placed a smaller garrison. In
each post were established men who received provisions (as pay);

[PDF p. 139]

they had orders to watch, with bells; and if they saw coming toward their side someone of whom
they were afraid, they were to ring the bells one after another; in this way, from whatever
point the first stroke of the bell set out, all would be informed at the same hour and would
thus be on their guard. By this means Egypt found itself safe from surprises. The construction
of this wall was completed in six months; it is called the "Wall of the Old Woman," and there
remain in the Said numerous traces of it. El-Masoudi claims that she had built this wall only
out of solicitude for her son, who was very fond of the chase and for whom she dreaded the
animals of the desert and the sea as well as the attacks of the kings and the wandering tribes
surrounding the country; she placed all along this wall crocodiles and other beasts. Many other
things are said that we do not report. Dalukah reigned, it is claimed, thirty years.

The author says: "There are vestiges of this Wall of the Old Woman in the Said, and a certain
very aged old man, Mohammed ben el-Mas'oudi, told me that, traveling in the Said with some
companions along the Wall of the Old Woman, one of them tore from this wall an enormous brick,
of quite other dimensions than those made today. They passed it from hand to hand to examine
it, when, falling to the ground, it broke and let escape a bean of an extraordinary size and an
unheard-of dimension, such as one does not find in our days. The skin of the bean was removed,
and it was found sound and intact, free of worms and germs of corruption, as if it had just been
picked, without any difference. The assembly divided it, and each ate a piece of it; it was no
doubt for them that this bean had been preserved for centuries, for no one can die without
having eaten what God has reserved for him.

There was then, says Abd el-Hakem, an old sorceress named Badour whom the magicians venerated
and considered as surpassing them in magical

[PDF p. 140]

science. Dalukah, daughter of Zeba, sent to her a messenger who said to her: "We have need of
your magic and we have recourse to you, for we fear the kings may attack us. Make us therefore
something that will render us superior to our neighbors. When Pharaoh was alive, he had recourse
to you; how could we do otherwise, now that our great ones have disappeared (that is, were
drowned with the Pharaoh of Moses) and that there remains of our people only a small number?"
Badour raised in the middle of Memphis a temple of stone, fitted with four doors, each turned
toward one of the four cardinal points -- south, north, east, and west; in this temple she drew
images of horses, mules, asses, boats, and men, then she said to the Egyptians: "I have made you
a work by which will be destroyed all those who would wish to attack you, from whatever side
they come, by sea or by land; by it you will be safe from the blows of fate, and you will have
nothing to fear from whoever marches against you in any direction. If they come by land, mounted
on horses, mules, or asses, embarked in ships or on foot, these images (painted in the temple)
will stir on the side from which the enemy will come, and whatever you do to these images, your
enemies will undergo in reality." Now, the kings having learned the situation of the Egyptians,
and knowing that the direction of affairs was now in the hands of women, resolved to attack them
and marched against them. As soon as they approached Egypt, the images of the temple stirred;
the Egyptians set to work; and all they did to these images happened really to the army advancing
against them. Were they horses? all they did to the horses painted in the temple -- whether they
cut off their heads or their hocks, put out their eyes or pierced their flanks -- happened exactly
to the horses of the aggressors; for the boats, for the foot soldiers, it was the same. The
Egyptians were the men most versed in magic and the most powerful, thanks to this science; this
power was maintained, and other men respected them.

Pharaoh and his people having perished in the waters, the women of Egypt, although there
remained in this country only slaves and hired servants, could not however do without men. One
woman set the example, freed her slave, and married him; a second took her domestic for a
husband, and an agreement was made with the men that they would undertake nothing without the
[...]

[PDF p. 141]

permission of the women, which was accepted. Such was the origin of the empire of women over
men. Yezid ben Abou Habib asserts that the Coptic women still enjoy today the same privileges
and that no man sells or buys anything whatever without saying: "I will consult my wife."

Dalukah, daughter of Zeba, reigned twenty years and directed the affairs of Egypt until the son
of one of the nobles (lost with Pharaoh) had reached his majority. He was named Darkoun, son of
Beloutis, and was elected king. But Egypt did not cease to be directed by the counsels of the
old woman for nearly four hundred years. If any part of the temple of images fell into ruin, no
one could repair it but this old woman; this power passed then to her children, then to the
children of her children, who formed a family in which this science was transmitted; this family
has died out and disappeared today. As for the temple, it was destroyed in the time of Lukas,
son of Marnious, without anyone being able to repair it or to rediscover the means (of rebuilding
it); it therefore remained in ruins, and its virtue, by which the Egyptians surpassed other
peoples, vanished; the Egyptians became men like the others; they are only more numerous and
richer. Bokht-Nasr (Nebuchadnezzar), after his campaign of Jerusalem, having subjugated the
Beni-Israel, ravaged their country, and taken the people to Babel, attacked Egypt, overturned
its towns and villages, carried off its inhabitants, and left it desolate, so that Egypt was
ruined and deserted for forty years. The Nile flowed and disappeared without any use for anyone.
In the end, Bokht-Nasr, at the end of forty years, sent the Egyptians back to Egypt: the country
was repeopled, but since that time it has always been subject to other peoples.

A certain philosopher said: I have seen the temples (of Egypt) and examined them carefully, and
I recognized that they had been admirably ordered according to all the celestial figures. But
what clearly emerged from it for me is that they could not have been the work of a single sage,
but that peoples after peoples worked at them and completed them in a complete sidereal
revolution -- that is, in thirty-six thousand solar years; such works, indeed, could be
accomplished only by astronomical observations which, themselves, could be gathered only in the
span of time just mentioned. Their books were cut and carved in the rocks, engraved on the
stones,

[PDF p. 142]

and inlaid in the monuments. This writing, however, was employed only for books of exceptional
importance, or to recall a great event, to fix instructions of high utility, or to record the
account of a noble life whose memory one wished to perpetuate. This way of writing was employed
by other peoples than the Egyptians; one sees examples of it on the cupola of Rhamedan, on the
gate of Cairouan and that of Samarkand, on the column of Mareb, on the pillar of El-Moustaqarr,
at Ablaq Fard, and on the gate of Er-Raha (Edessa). It was employed preferentially in elevated
places, in famous localities, and it was traced at the places judged most safe from destruction
and ruin, where passers-by saw them most easily, so that they could not be forgotten in the
succession of the centuries.

According to El-Mas'oudi, Daluka raised the temples and the statues in Egypt, perfected the
magical tools, traced the image of those who might come to attack Egypt, from whatever side,
with their mounts, camels or horses. She represented as boats those who might come from the sea
of the West or from Syria, and she gathered in these immense temples of prodigious construction
all the secrets of nature and the properties of stones, plants, and animals. All this was
executed at determined astronomical moments coinciding with the celestial movements. If an army
marched against Egypt, whether it came from the Hedjaz or from Yemen, these images engraved in
the temple -- camels or others -- were subjected to treatments that really reached those of the
enemy army, and in this way the Egyptians were guaranteed against the attacks of the aggressors,
men and beasts. If the latter came from Syria, the same treatments were inflicted on the images
placed on the side from which the army of Syria came, and this army, men and animals, really
underwent the treatments inflicted on the images. It was the same for the armies coming from the
Maghreb, or from the sea of Roum, or from Syria, or from the other states. Thus kings and
peoples feared the Egyptians and protected them against their enemies. By the counsels and
artifices of this old woman, their kingdom formed a homogeneous whole and reached political
perfection. The ancients and those who followed them have spoken constantly of the properties
and secrets of nature known to the Egyptians; the account of the acts of this old woman was
transmitted by tradition and so widely spread that one cannot keep any doubt about

[PDF p. 143]

their authenticity. The temples of Egypt, in the Said and elsewhere, are still standing, and one
sees there all sorts of images which, drawn on any object whatever, still enjoy the property of
making executed that for which they were imagined and fabricated according to their doctrine of
the natural virtues; and God knows better than anyone how it is.

Several people of Akhmim, in the Said of Egypt, reported to me a saying of Abou-l-Faïd
Dhou'n-Noun ben Ibrahim el-Masri el-Akhmimi, the solitary philosopher who conducted himself by a
fixed rule and a method from which he never departed; he is one of those who most studied the
accounts relating to these temples and best examined the greater part of what is drawn in them,
and the writings and representations reproduced there: "I saw in a temple," he said, "a writing
that I examined attentively and that said: Beware of freed slaves, of young men, of armies become
slaves, and of the Nabataeans who call themselves Arabs. In another temple I saw another text
that said: Man, sustained by destiny, makes plans at which fate laughs. Finally in a third I saw
a text that, after a deep study, I read thus: You take counsel from the stars and you know
nothing, and the master of the stars does what he wishes."

This people, builders of the temples, studied with ardor the movements of the stars and scrutinized
the secrets of nature. The celestial movements taught them, among other things, that a cataclysm
was to occur on the earth, but it was ignorant whether it would be a deluge of fire that would
destroy all that was on the surface of the earth, or a deluge of water that would submerge it, or
finally a sword that would come to mow down the inhabitants. But, fearing that the annihilation of
men would entail the disappearance of the sciences, it built these temples where its sciences were
explained by writing, engraving, and drawing; these constructions were of two sorts: some of
stone, others of earth, this distinction being explained thus: "If," it said, "the cataclysm
occurs by fire, the constructions of earth will harden; if it occurs by water, the constructions
of earth will be destroyed, but those of stone will subsist; if it is a destructive sword, all
these monuments will remain, whether they be of stone or of earth." According to what is
recounted -- but God knows! -- these monuments existed well before the flood; but, according to
others, they were built well after this flood, and that cataclysm they had foreseen without
knowing precisely

[PDF p. 144]

whether it would occur by water, fire, or a sword, was perhaps indeed the sword, represented by a
people that hurled itself upon the Egyptians and by an invading king who made them perish.
According to others, this cataclysm would have been a plague that made most of the inhabitants
die; as proof one gives the hills of Tanis, made of human corpses heaped up, small and great, men
and women, and high as mountains; this place is known in Egypt under the name of the City of the
Hills; one also finds in the Said corpses piled one upon another in the underground chambers, the
grottoes, the catacombs, and a quantity of places in the ground, without its being possible to
know what this people was. The Christians do not recognize them as their ancestors, nor the Jews
as their forefathers, and the Muslims are ignorant of who they are. No history speaks to us of
them. They are still clothed in their garments, and many things found in the temples and the
hypogea served as ornaments to these bodies.

The temples of Egypt are marvelous constructions still standing, such as the temple of Akhmim,
that of Samanoud, and many others.

[PDF p. 145]

CHAPTER XI
OF THE HIDDEN CACHES AND TREASURES THAT THE EGYPTIANS CALL MOUTALEB (THINGS SOUGHT)

Here is how Abou Amr ben Abd el-Barr and el-Baihaqi, in their book of the Indications, in the
chapter of the traditions reported by Ibn Abbas, recount the origin of the legitimacy of the
search for treasures: "On leaving Et-Taif, the Prophet of God passed near the tomb of Abou
Raghal and said: Here is the tomb of Abou Raghal, father of the tribe of Tsaqif. When his people
perished, he cried out in the sanctuary and God preserved him, but when he went out of the
temple, God made misfortune fall upon him. As proof of what I advance, he had buried with him a
column of gold." The believers (who were with the Prophet) rushed toward the tomb, cleared it,
and brought out the column.

According to the traditions of Abd Allah ben Omar, it is said: "Going to Et-Taif, we passed near
a tomb, and I heard the Prophet say: Here is the tomb of Abou Raghal who, as long as he remained
in the sanctuary, was preserved (from death), but as soon as he went out, was struck by the same
death as his people; he was buried here, and the proof of it is that there was buried with him a
staff of gold. If you clear the tomb, you will find this staff there." The people rushed and drew
out the staff, which was indeed near the dead man.

There are in Egypt the treasures of Joseph, as well as those of the kings who preceded and
followed him. Joseph indeed hoarded all the riches that remained after having provided for the
expenses and the purchases of provisions in view of the years of dearth; and it is of these
treasures that God meant to speak when he said: "We tore them from their gardens, their springs,
their treasures (Koran, XXVI, 57)." (The book of) the science of treasures is found, it is said,
in the church of Constantinople, where it was brought from Toledo. It is recounted also that the
Greeks, on leaving Syria and Egypt, had buried most of their riches in special places [...]

[PDF p. 146]

specially intended for this use, and had written books in which these places were designated, as
well as the means of finding them. These books are said to have been deposited at Constantinople,
and it is there that one would find all that relates to the treasures. The Greeks, it is said on
the other hand, wrote nothing, but discovered books on the science of treasures left by the kings
who had preceded them -- Greeks, Chaldeans, or Egyptians; on their departure from Egypt and Syria,
they carried these books with them and deposited them in the church (in question). They are
entrusted, it is asserted, to no one except the old servants of the Church, and even then only a
single sheet is given to each, which is for him his chance of good fortune. According to
El-Maçoudi, there circulate in Egypt marvelous accounts of the treasures, the monuments, and the
riches buried in the hypogea -- objects deposited there by the kings and other personages who
inhabited this country. These treasures are still called today moutaleb (things sought), and we
have spoken of all this in our previous works.

Among other accounts, here is what Yahia ben Baqir recounts: "Abd el-Aziz ben Merwan was governor
of Egypt on behalf of his brother Abd el-Malik ben Merwan, when a man, who called himself a giver
of good counsel, came to him. 'And what is the counsel you have to give me?' asked Abd el-Aziz.
'It is that in such a cupola is found a considerable treasure.' 'And who proves it?' asked the
governor. 'The proof of it,' said the man, 'is that after digging very little one will discover
plaques of marble and alabaster; continuing the clearing, one will reach a door of bronze, beneath
which is placed a column of gold surmounted by a cock whose eyes are made of two rubies worth the
empire of the world, and whose wings are inlaid with rubies and emeralds; its feet rest on leaves
of gold placed at the summit of the column.'" Abd el-Aziz had money delivered to the man for the
wages of the diggers and of those who would have to work at the treasure. It was a considerable
hill; a great hole was made in the ground, and the objects of marble and alabaster indicated by
the man were discovered. This first discovery filled Abd el-Aziz with enthusiasm; he had a greater
number of workers brought and increased the sum necessary for their wages. The digging continued,
and the head of the cock was brought to light; as soon as it appeared, there

[PDF p. 147]

spread an extraordinary brilliance and light caused by the rubies that served it as eyes. Then
appeared its wings; then its feet; then the summit of the column; then, around the column, a
colonnade made of all sorts of stones and marbles; then vaulted corridors, with rounded niches
above the doors; in these niches were seen statues and images of gold representing personages in
all forms, and coffers of stone with their lids sealed. Abd el-Aziz mounted his horse and hurried
to the place of the excavations to see what was already discovered. A worker rushed forward and
set his foot on the step of a bronze staircase that led to the bottom of the excavation. But
scarcely were his two feet set on the steps when a sword of Ad appeared to the left of the stairs
and another to the right; the two swords joined on the man, who could not be saved and whose body,
cut in two, rolled down the steps; when the body was stretched on the steps, the column stirred,
the cock uttered a terrible whistle that was heard far away; it beat its wings, and marvelous
voices came out of its pedestal; for the whole had been made by means of springs and mechanisms;
thus, as soon as something falls on these steps or merely brushes them, the staircase shifts and
the man is dragged to the bottom of the hole. At this excavation were present, between diggers,
overseers, earth-carriers, and curious onlookers, givers of advice or cumbersome persons, nearly
a thousand men who all perished. Abd el-Aziz went away, saying: "The treasure buried there is truly
marvelous and impossible to reach; God preserve us from it!" Then, on his orders, the crowd threw
the earth that had been extracted back over the bodies of the victims, and this place was their
tomb.

"There had been formed," adds Maçoudi, "an association of seekers of treasures and caches, who
worked ceaselessly and were always making soundings in the ground, in search of the treasures and
objects that the kings and peoples of old had confided to the land of Egypt. They had found a book
written in characters of the past time and giving the description of a place situated in Egypt a
few cubits from one of the pyramids, where there was a marvelous treasure. They informed of it
Akhshid Mohammed ben Tafag, who gave them the order to dig at this place and to make themselves
masters of the treasure by all possible means. They therefore dug an enormous hole and reached an
ensemble of corridors and cupolas adorned with stones cut in the rock, on which were

[PDF p. 148]

erected wooden statues standing and coated with an unguent, to preserve them from too rapid a
corruption and prevent the disaggregation of their parts. These statues differed among themselves
and represented old men, young men, women, children; the eyes were made of all sorts of stones
such as rubies, emeralds, topazes, turquoises; some had a face of gold or silver. One of these
statues was broken, and there was found in the interior a decomposed and destroyed corpse; near
each of them were placed vases, lerani and others, of marble or alabaster; these vases still
contained the unguent with which the body placed in the wooden statue had been anointed. This
unguent is a drug ground, kneaded, and worked, without odor. A little of it was put on the fire,
and there was exhaled from it a very sweet odor, different from all the perfumes known. Each
wooden statue had been made in the likeness of the man it enclosed, taking account of the
differences of age, of years, and of bodily features. Facing each of these statues was erected
another of marble or green alabaster representing the idol the proprietor of the statue had
worshiped. On each image were traced writings that no one among those who have a (revealed)
religion has been able to decipher. Certain scholars have claimed that this writing had ceased to
be in use in Egypt four thousand years ago, and what we have just said is a proof that they are
neither Jews nor Christians. The excavation produced only the statues of which we have spoken.
This happened in 328 [18 October 939 to 5 October 940], and to all those who, before or after
this period, have governed Egypt from Ahmed ben Touloun and his successors to this year -- that
is, in the year 332 [4 September 943 to 23 August 944] -- are attributed marvelous accounts of the
discoveries made in their time, in the way of treasures, riches, gems, and the finds of tombs made
in these searches for treasures. But we have spoken of all this in the preceding parts of our work.

One day, Ahmed ibn Touloun went on horseback to the pyramids. There his chamberlain came to him
with a troop of people covered with woolen garments, armed with axes and levers. Ibn Touloun asked
them what they were doing. "We are seekers of treasures," they said. "Extract none in the future
without my order," said Ibn Touloun, "or without the order of a man of mine."

[PDF p. 149]

These people informed him that, in the direction of the pyramids, was a treasure they could not
reach. He then gave them Er-Rafaqi and wrote for the governor of Ghizeh the order to furnish them
men and money. Then he departed. The others worked a long time; in the end the treasure appeared;
Ahmed ibn Touloun went to the excavation; the diggers were still digging and had uncovered a vat
filled with dinars, on which was placed a lid covered with berbeti characters. A man knowing this
writing was brought, and here is the sense of the text: "I am so-and-so, son of so-and-so, the
king who freed the gold of its impurities and its dross; and he who wishes to know by how much my
government surpassed his has only to examine by how much the standard of my dinars surpasses the
standard of his. He who knew how to purify the gold was, himself too, pure during his life and is
so still after his death." "Glory to God!" cried Ibn Touloun; "what I have gained by this single
inscription is worth more to me than the wealth." Then he had two hundred dinars distributed to
each of the seekers of treasures. Each workman received five of them, besides the integral payment
of his wages; Er-Rafaqi had for his share three hundred dinars and his servant Nessim a thousand.
Ibn Touloun carried off what remained of the dinars and found their standard far superior to that
of all the others. From this period he became very strict about the standard of the gold in
Egypt, so much so that the standard of his dinars is now universally known under the name of
Ahmedi, which is the most perfect standard; it was his dinars alone that were used for gilding.

[PDF p. 150]

CHAPTER XII
OF THE DESTRUCTION OF THE RICHES OF THE EGYPTIANS

God reports: "Moses said: O my Lord, you have given Pharaoh and his great ones glory and riches in
the life of this world; is it, O my God, so that they may turn away from your path? O my God,
overturn their riches, and harden their hearts; let them not believe until after having undergone
the terrible punishment." And God said: "Your prayer is granted" (Koran, X, 88). Such is the prayer
of Moses against Pharaoh and his people, the Egyptians, because of their impiety, that God might
destroy their riches. Ez-Zaggag says that "to disfigure a thing" is used to say that one makes it
lose its first form.

According to Abd Allah ben Abbas and Mohammed ben Ka'b El-Qorazi, the riches and the dirhems of the
Egyptians were changed into engraved stones that preserved their primitive forms, whether they were
whole dinars, thirds, or halves of dinars. God left subsisting no mine of which one of their
descendants could make use. "We were told," says Qatadat, "that their riches and their harvests were
changed into stones." Mogahed and Atiah say that God destroyed them so thoroughly that they
disappeared. One says "a destroyed spring," to signify that a spring is dried up, and "to destroy a
place" when a place has been overturned and ruined.

According to Ibn Zeid, the dinars of the Egyptians, their dirhems, their furnishings, with all they
possessed, were changed into stones. Mohammed ben Ka'b recounts that a man and his wife lying
together on their bed were both changed into stones, and he adds: Omar ben Abd el-Aziz questioned me
one day, and I recounted this fact to him. He then had brought a sack found in Egypt and drew from
it fruits, dirhems, and dinars, and all this was of stone. "One day," [...]

[PDF p. 151]

recounts Mohammed ben Shehab ez-Zaheri, "I went to see Omar ben Abd el-Aziz; he called: 'Hey,
slave, bring the sack!' The sack was brought and emptied; there were in it dirhems, dinars, dates,
nuts, lentils, beans. 'Eat, Ben Shehab,' Omar said to me; I stretched out my hand, but all this
was of stone. And I said: 'What is this, O Commander of the Faithful?' 'This,' he answered me, 'is
a part of what Abd el-Aziz ben Merwan found, when he was governor of Egypt, and comes from the
riches of the Egyptians that God destroyed.'" El-Modareb ben Abd Allah esh-Shami says: "Someone
told me he had seen in Egypt a palm tree lying on the ground that was of stone; and indeed," he
added, "I have seen a number of people, standing or seated, occupied with their work; to see them,
one would have taken them without hesitation for real men, but on examining them more closely, one
recognized that they were men of stone. I saw an Egyptian slave occupied in plowing with two
bulls, and the man and the bulls were of stone." Ousama ben Mousa, in his History of the Prophets,
recounts that after the disaster of Pharaoh and his people, and when the Beni Israel, struck by
this prodigy, had converted to the true faith, Moses chose from among the twelve tribal chiefs two
chiefs, Kaleb ben Mouqiah and Yousha' ben Noun (Joshua son of Nun), and sent them to Egypt, each
with twelve thousand men. Egypt no longer had anyone on whom to lean since Pharaoh and his people
had perished in the waves. They therefore seized the objects and treasures of Pharaoh and returned
to Moses. This explains the verse: "I made them heirs of the land of Egypt," and the passage of
the Koran where it is a question of the people of Pharaoh: "And we tore them from their gardens,
their springs, their treasures, their places of delight (Koran, XXVI, 57-58)," adding: "And I will
make it the heritage of another people"; and this other passage: "And we will give as a heritage
to the people of the weak the east and the west of the land in which is placed our blessing
(Koran, VII, 133)" -- that is: of the land of Egypt we will make the heritage of the Beni Israel,
for these are the weak who were there; this comes in witness to this other verse: "We wish to be
benevolent toward the weak of the earth, we will make of them imams and heirs (of the soil) and we
will make them powerful on the earth" (Koran, XXVIII, 4-5).

The compiler and author of the book adds: Daoud ben Rizq ben Abd Allah, who had long traveled
through Egypt, told me that, passing through a valley near Qlimoun in the southern region, he saw
considerable fields planted

[PDF p. 152]

with watermelons, cucumbers, and fruits, which were all of stone. Formerly a great personage told
me that, in one of his journeys in Egypt, he had seen a great number of watermelons that were all
of stone. Such are the summer watermelons called Abdali.

[PDF p. 153]

CHAPTER XIII
OF THE CHARACTER OF THE EGYPTIANS, OF THEIR MANNERS, AND OF THEIR TEMPERAMENT

Abou-l-Hassan Ali ben Radouan the physician says: "According to what is recounted, Masr was the
name of one of the children of the prophet Noah. It is reported that this Masr, having stopped in
this country, took root here, peopled it, and gave it his name. The region that bears this name
today is the one where the Nile flows and which is entirely enclosed within these four limits: the
sun, rising at the eastern extremity of the earth, eight hours and a third before reaching Egypt,
sets at the western extremity of the inhabited world, three hours and two thirds after having left
Egypt. From this it results that this region is situated in the western half of the inhabited
quarter of the earth, and this western half, according to Hippocrates and Ptolemy, is endowed with
a lesser heat and a greater humidity than the eastern half; for it forms part of the division
subject to the influence of the moon, while the eastern half is subject to the influence of the
sun; this is explained by the fact that the sun rises in the eastern part and appears only
afterward in the western part, and that the moon, on the contrary, rises in the western part and
appears only afterward in the eastern part. Ancient authors have claimed that Egypt occupied
exactly the middle of the inhabited quarter of the earth, but, as we have explained, it is
situated in reality in the western half. The third limit is represented by the shortest distance
separating this country from the equator; it is from Assouan that this distance must be counted.
From this point to the equator there are 22 deg 30'. The sun passes to the zenith of the people of
this locality twice in the year, when it arrives at the end of the Twins or the beginning of the
Crab. At these two moments, an inhabitant of Assouan standing upright would cast no shadow at
noon. Heat, dryness, and torridity are the dominant states there, for the sun there makes

[PDF p. 154]

the humidity evaporate; thus the complexion of the inhabitants is black and their hair curly,
because of the burning ardor of the climate. The fourth limit is represented by the longest
distance from the north of Egypt to the equator; this distance is counted from the shore of the
sea of Roum, on which are situated a number of towns of Egypt, such as Alexandria, Rosetta,
Damietta, Tanis, Farama: the distance from Damietta to the equator is 31 deg 20', the terminal
point of the third clime and the initial point of the fourth; the sun there maintains itself at a
medium distance, neither too near nor too far. The temperature there is temperate, with a slight
propensity to heat; the temperate zone, in the inhabited part of the earth, is in reality at the
beginning of the fourth clime. The situation of Damietta on the sea, which moreover surrounds it,
makes it enjoy a climate holding the middle between the hot and the cold, but approaching above all
the mean for humidity. The dominant state there is therefore humidity, but humidity without
complication of cold or heat. For this reason the complexion of its inhabitants is brown, their
character gentle, and their hair smooth. Now, the extreme southern point of Egypt having for its
dominant state heat, and its extreme northern point a medium temperature with a slight inclination
toward heat, it follows that Egypt, being situated between these two points, has for its
characteristic heat; this heat diminishes as one moves away from Assouan and approaches the sea of
Roum. This is why Hippocrates and Galen said that the dominant state in Egypt is heat. The mountain
Luka, which extends to the east of this country, shelters it against the east wind; indeed, this
wind never makes itself felt at Fostat-Masr, where it arrives only obliquely from the northeast or
southeast; the east wind is a dry wind that preserves from corruption, but the Egyptians are
deprived of its advantages. Thus the localities of Egypt where this wind blows are in a better
state than the others; Alexandria and Tanis are in this case. This mountain prevents the sun from
shining on Egypt although it is already above the horizon; thereby the duration of its radiation on
the soil is less than it should be; this same phenomenon is the cause of the stagnation and the
thickening of the air.

The land of Egypt abounds in animals and plants, to such a point that it is almost impossible to
find a place devoid of animals or plants. It is a weak land which, when the Nile has just
withdrawn, appears like a mud. But, as soon as the heat has absorbed the humidity found there,

[PDF p. 155]

the soil splits into wide crevices. There where the animals and plants abound, corruption also
abounds. Egypt therefore unites the ardor of the temperature with the abundance of plants and
animals. This explains the calcination and the black color of its soil, for truly the earth there
is black. In the vicinity of the mountains the earth is mixed with sebakh, borax, and salt. In the
evening there rises from the soil of Egypt a black vapor or dust; this phenomenon takes place
chiefly during the summer. Egypt divides into numerous regions that each produce a thing not found
in the others; the cause of this is that this country is very narrow and extends in length over the
second and third climes. The Said is remarkable for its palms, its acacias, its thickets of reeds
and papyrus, its charcoal-works, and many other things; in the Fayoum are found a quantity of
ponds, thickets of reeds, lakes for retting flax; Lower Egypt abounds in plants of multiple
species -- colocasia, banana trees, etc. In sum, each part of Egypt has a product peculiar to it
that distinguishes it from the others. The Nile makes humid the dryness of summer and autumn, and
we have explained that what dominates in Egypt is heat and accidental humidity, that this country
is divided into numerous regions, and that its air and its water are bad. The ancients have
demonstrated that the places where corruption abounds give off numerous exhalations into the
atmosphere, which the varieties of miasmas prevent from remaining immutable. It has been
demonstrated that the atmosphere of Egypt changes very rapidly because the sun does not heat the
soil for a normal duration. Hence frequent changes in the state of the air of Egypt, changes that
sometimes occur in the course of a single day: at one moment it is hot, at another it is cold; now
it is dry, now humid; now the air is agitated, now it is calm; now the sun shines, now it is veiled
by clouds. In sum, the atmosphere of Egypt is very variable and never remains in the same state. It
is for this reason that the humors circulating in the arteries and the veins are never either in
the same state. The continual changes of the air, and the slight altitude of the mountains, remedy
the inconvenience caused by the evaporation that occurs each day at the surface of the soil and
that the heat of the soil itself prevents from condensing in the atmosphere. If, during the cold
hours of the night, the air freshens, the [...]

[PDF p. 156]

fog lowers toward the surface of the soil and forms clouds that produce rain and dew. Sometimes
these clouds are reabsorbed by an unknown phenomenon. Thus each day the fogs condensed the day
before dissolve, and that is why the rain-clouds rarely accumulate in Egypt. It is clear also that
the soil of Egypt is each day moistened by the air that has become impregnated with fogs that
resolve into rain or disperse. Certain authors have claimed that the clouds were formed by the
transformation of air into water; and if we add this fact to what we have already said, one will
realize much more clearly the variations of the air in Egypt and the corruption found there in
abundance. It is therefore well established that the climate of Egypt undergoes numerous
variations and that accidental humidity is frequent there -- humidity that accelerates corruption
in this country. The reason for this is that the seasons that are ordinarily the driest in other
regions are the most humid in Egypt; here, indeed, summer and autumn become humid, owing to the
swelling of the Nile and the inundation, contrary to what happens in other countries.

Hippocrates teaches us that the humidity of summer and autumn is accidental -- that is, that it is
produced by abnormal causes, such as the humidity of rain that falls in summer; this is what led
us to say that the humidity of Egypt is accidental, for heat and dryness constitute in reality the
normal state of Egypt, but it happens that this state changes into accidental humidity as a
consequence of the rise of the Nile during summer and autumn, a circumstance that determines a
considerable corruption. This is what explains the present bad state of Egypt, whose land is
puny, the abundance of corruption that reigns there, and the bad quality of the water and the air.
These inconveniences have no perceptible influence on the body of the Egyptians, accustomed to
this state, and their body is appropriate to it. All that Egypt produces, animals and plants, is
similar to Egypt itself: exiguous bodies, insignificant strength, frequent variability, extreme
ease in falling ill, very brief duration; the wheat of Egypt is an example of this: it corrupts
easily and rapidly and ripens in a short time; animate bodies, as is known, do not differ from
wheat in the rapidity of development. And how could it be otherwise, since bodies are a compound
of all this ensemble? The condition of the plants and animals that

[PDF p. 157]

Egypt produces, from the point of view of the weakness caused by the innumerable variabilities,
the intense corruption, the rapidity in falling ill, is similar to that of the soil itself, which
is weak too, corrupts, varies, and transforms rapidly; the situations are indeed identical. And
this is what allows the animals to live there and the plants to grow there, for, being issued from
this ensemble of circumstances, they do not differ from their milieu and can prosper. As for the
foreign objects imported into Egypt, they alter as soon as they are in contact with this
atmosphere, but if their stay is prolonged and they bend to the ambient air and accustom themselves
to it, they come to resemble the objects produced by the Egyptian soil.

As for the foods and drinks used in Egypt: the cereals alter very quickly, being weak by nature
and rapidly corrupted, like wheat, barley, lentils, chickpeas, purslane, and chickling vetch, for
all these grains spoil in a very short time, and none of the dishes prepared with these seeds has
the taste of the same dishes prepared in other countries. After a day and a night, the bread made
of Egyptian wheat is no longer edible and, if one tastes it, one no longer finds any savor in it;
it disaggregates, having no more cohesion, and spoils rapidly; likewise for the flour; this is
what explains the difference one observes (between the bread of Egypt) and that of other countries.
All the grains of Egypt are in the same case, as are its fruits and the foods drawn from them. None
of this lasts long; everything, on the contrary, decomposes rapidly and in a very short time. What
is imported into Egypt evidently alters under the influence of the frequently variable air of the
country, and loses little by little its first nature to approach the state of Egypt; it is not so
when the importation is new and the journey still recent, for the imported object then still keeps
something of its primitive qualities. The animals on which the inhabitants feed have, if they are
of the country, a nature in keeping with that of the people of the country themselves; like them
they are weak, change rapidly, and consequently suit the nature of these people. The imported
animals -- the large sheep of Barca, for example -- acquire, as a consequence of the journey, a
dryness, an aridity, and humors not in keeping with those of the Egyptians; thus, on their arrival
in Egypt, most of these beasts are ill, but, if they stay a suitable time, their nature transforms
and puts itself

[PDF p. 158]

in keeping with that of the Egyptians. Most of the Egyptians use as drink the water of the Nile; we
have spoken sufficiently of the virtues of this water. Some drink the water of wells, more in
keeping with their nature. As for the water of cisterns, few people use it in Egypt. Their best
drink is the shamsi, for the honey introduced into it preserves its virtue and retards its
corruption. The time when this drink is made is the hottest of the year; the heat makes the
beverage ferment, and the raisins that are its base come from countries where the air is better.
Wine is very little used unless honey is added to it: it is pressed from the grapes of the country,
so it is of the same nature as the people; but the shamsi is preferred to it. Apart from the shamsi
and wine, all the drinks used in Egypt are bad and without virtue, because of the rapidity of
transformation caused by the elements composing them. Such is the case of date wine, cooked wine,
and wheat beer. The food of the Egyptians differs (according to the region). The people of the Said
feed chiefly on dates and confections prepared with sugarcane; this plant is also sent to Fostat
and to other towns where it is sold as a comestible. In the Delta, colocasia and chickpeas are
eaten most often -- products that are likewise transported to Fostat and elsewhere, where they are
sold and eaten. Most of the Egyptians make great use as food of fresh or salted fish; others feed
on milk or milk products. The peasants prepare a kind of bread named ka'k, made with pounded and
dried wheat; it is the basis of their food throughout the year. As a general rule, each class of
the people maintains its body by means of things that suit it and to which it is habituated and
appropriated. But among the Egyptians the food is rather bad, which has no influence on their
temperament, long since made to it. It is nevertheless one of the causes of the weakness and
debility of their constitution and of the ease with which they become ill. The people of the
countryside move and walk more than the people of the towns; thus their bodies are more solid, for
walking straightens and fortifies the limbs. The Saïdians are more slender, darker in color,
thinner, and weaker because of the much stronger heat among them than in the Delta. The people of
the Delta have abundant stools and urine because the heat

[PDF p. 159]

is less in their country and they make use of cold and compact foods, such as colocasia.

As for the humors of the Egyptians, they resemble one another; the vigor of the soul, indeed, is a
consequence of the state of the body, and their body is weak, quick to change, not very robust, and
not very hardy against ills. Their character is exactly the same; what dominates in them is
fickleness, indecision, indolence, cowardice, despair, avarice, impatience, disdain for study,
quickness to take fright, jealousy, slander, lying, the facility to calumniate others before the
king and to accuse them; in short, the foundation of their character is composed of the vilest
defects produced by the baseness of the soul. Not all are thus; but these defects are met with in
most of them. There are however some to whom God has apportioned virtue and beauty of character and
whom he has preserved from vices. This property of the land of Egypt of infiltrating into souls
cowardice and baseness is the cause that lions do not live there, or, if there is one in the
country, it degenerates and loses its virtue of reproduction. The dogs of Egypt are less bold than
those of other countries. Exception must be made for the animals whose nature is everywhere the
same, like the ass and the hare.

Galen, it is said, held that the season of spring was naturally temperate; he was far from
believing it hot and humid. Among other virtues, this season enjoys the property of fortifying the
bodies, facilitating digestion, bringing back the heat, purifying the animal spirits by the
equality and limpidity of the air and the equilibrium of the days and nights, and developing the
blood. One calls "equal air" that in which is met neither excess of cold or heat, nor excess of
humidity or dryness; in these conditions it is pure and limpid, a circumstance that fortifies the
animal spirits; the bodies are put back into the normal state, the vivacity of the animals
increases, beings grow, enlarge, and are pushed to reproduction. Now, if we seek in Egypt some air
such as we have just described, we find it only during the months of Amchir, Barmahat, Barmoudah,
and Bachans -- the time when the Sun occupies the second half of the Water-Carrier, the Whale, the
Ram, and the Bull. We meet then in Egypt days equal to the nights, a pure and limpid air without
excess of heat or cold, of humidity or dryness. The sun there is free of clouds, the air is calm
and without agitation, except in the months of Barmoudah and

[PDF p. 160]

Bachans, during which it is necessary that the north wind come to temper by its freshness the heat
of the sun. Then too the animals take more movement, give themselves over to coitus, their voice
becomes more beautiful; the trees cover themselves with leaves, the flowers half-open, the
reproductive force increases, the chyme predominates in the blood. In Egypt, this season advances
by a number of days equal to that of the days by which it is diminished at the end, because of the
heat proper to this period. At the beginning of this season are met very cold days, in the month of
Amchir, when the north wind blows and the sun is veiled by clouds. This is due to the fact that the
season of spring penetrates into the season of winter, and if the north wind blows at this moment,
the freshness cools the air, which from temperate becomes cold; moreover, the abundance of humid
vapors rising from the soil renders the air humid and brings it back to its winter state.
Sometimes, however, the air is freshened by other winds than the north wind; if, for example, the
south wind -- which is the hottest of all the winds -- blows in this season, it borrows cold from
the earth and the water previously cooled by the air of winter, and, passing over a cold thing,
takes from it a part of its freshness. But if this wind continues to blow for many consecutive
days, it becomes burning again and heats the air and dries it. A proof that the freshness of the
south wind, called by the Egyptians marisi, comes indeed from the cold of the water and the earth
of Egypt and not from a cause inherent in this wind, is that, as long as this wind blows, one does
not see accumulate in the atmosphere those clouds which, by the effect of the heat, give off humid
vapors and condense by the effect of the cold of the night. The heat of the south wind prevents
the cold from concentrating and disperses it. If this wind persists, it warms the water and the
earth and returns to its natural state, which is heat. When the season of spring is in advance of
its normal time, these changes occur, and the wind, on its arrival in Egypt, is subject to the
variations caused by this multiplicity of states and by the quantity of fogs it absorbs. Think
what it must be during the other seasons. Thus in spring the winds are frequent, and the physicians
delay the administration of purgatives until the season is well established -- that is, until the
time when the sun traverses the signs of the Ram and the Bull.

Then one enters the season of summer, which comprises the end of Bachans, Boo- [...]

[PDF p. 161]

nah, Abib, and a part of Mesori -- the time when the sun traverses the Twins, the Crab, the Lion,
and a part of the Ear (Virgo). The heat then becomes stronger, as does the dryness; the grains dry
out, the fruits swell, and those who eat them fill their bodies with bad chyme. When the sun has
entered the Crab, the Nile begins to grow and to spread over the land of Egypt. The natural
condition of summer is changed by the enormous accumulation of vapors that rise from the water
into the atmosphere. At the beginning of this season, when the sun is in the sign of the Twins,
certain days are met that enjoy an air similar to that of certain days of spring, when the sun is
veiled by clouds and the north wind blows. A great number of physicians are deceived by this and
then administer purgatives, believing themselves to be in spring; the skillful physician will not
be deceived and will wait until the heat is well established; but most care very little about it.
At the end of summer the Nile is at its full; and it is clear that this season was in advance of
its normal time by as many days as it will be diminished at the end; the end of summer is marked
by great disturbances brought on by the considerable quantity of vapors that rise from the soil
and mix with the air. If the bodies of the Egyptians did not have the habit of these variations
and were not fashioned to this temperature, they would be subject to the diseases that Hippocrates
affirms must occur when the summer is humid.

Next comes the season of autumn, which, by its nature, is humid. This season embraces the second
half of Mesori, the months of Thot and Baba, and some days of the month of Hathor. During this
time the sun occupies successively the second half of the Ear (Virgo), the Balance, and the
Scorpion. At the beginning of this season, the Nile finishes growing and spreads over the lands,
covers the soil of Egypt, and from its waters give off considerable vapors which, mixing with the
air, change the nature of autumn and make it pass from dryness to the humid state, to such a point
that sometimes in this season rain falls and clouds accumulate in the atmosphere. In this season
are met days when the heat is very strong, although in reality it ought to be rather weak there;
but if the air is rid of all humid vapor, autumn returns to its normal state -- that is, to heat.
There are also met days similar to certain spring days: this happens when the nights become

[PDF p. 162]

equal to the days and the water vapor renders the air humid. The variations of the atmosphere are
more accentuated in this season because of the abundance of humid vapors; now it is hot and now
cold, now dry and most often humid, and this lasts until the humidity of the water prevails. In
autumn, the Egyptians catch a great number of fish which, absorbed, produce in the body a viscous
humor that transforms for the most part into bile, if it comes into contact with some bilious
humor. Thus the animal spirits inherent in the body alter, the humors set themselves in movement,
digestion operates painfully in the belly, the intestines, and the veins, and there is produced
an unhealthy chyme abundant in bilious or melancholic humors, in viscous phlegms, in raw humor or
cooked humor; most often the humor produced is a compound of all this, and it is this that
determines the appearance of diseases. At the end of autumn, the Nile withdraws, the land is
uncovered, and the air cools; the fish teem (on the ground), the vapors no longer rise, and the
corruption becomes greater. By means of it, diseases propagate, and, without the long habit they
have of it, the Egyptians would be overwhelmed with far more numerous diseases.

Finally one enters the season of winter, a season by its nature cold and dry. It lasts during the
second half of Hathor, Khiak, and Tobe, when the Sun traverses the Archer, the Capricorn, and a
part of the Water-Carrier, which makes less than three months. The cause of this is in the heat of
the soil of Egypt and the variability of the bodies. At the beginning of this season, the land is
uncovered, plowing is done; corruption then spreads because of the great quantity of seeds, animal
excrement, and detritus put to use, and because the land is weak; it is indeed, at this moment,
like mud and produces in abundance rats, worms, plants, and herbs. There also give off from the
land abundant vapors which, condensing in the atmosphere, end by forming a curtain so thick that
it becomes impossible in the morning to distinguish the colors of the nearest objects. [Footnote:
an allusion to the religious prescription that fixes the moment of the morning prayer at the
precise instant when one can distinguish a white thread from a black thread.] One catches
innumerable quantities of fish enclosed in the pools of water; these fish, incapable of moving,
corrupt and once absorbed produce

[PDF p. 163]

in the body abundant viscous matters that predispose to corruption. At the beginning of this
season, the diseases are more intense; this intensity ceases when the cold is well established,
when the digestion has become regular, when the air has taken on a perfect fixity, when the
natural heat has returned to the interior of the bodies, when the land covers itself with plants
and the corruption stops; the bodies then become more vigorous; this happens at the end of Khiak
and during the month of Tobe. It has been demonstrated that the seasons in Egypt are very variable
and that the worst weather of the year -- in other words the months of Hathor and Khiak, that is,
the end of autumn and the beginning of winter -- is the most fecund in diseases. The seasons vary
and put themselves in relation with what is unhealthy in Egypt; but these variations have less
influence on the Egyptians than they would have in other countries, if similar variations were to
occur there. It has been recognized that the first cause of this state of things is the swelling
of the Nile during the summer and its spreading over the lands during the autumn, contrary to what
happens for the other rivers of the inhabited earth, which swell only at the particularly humid
periods -- that is, during winter and spring.

From all that precedes one may conclude that the accidental humidity is considerable in Egypt, and
that the local diseases are due specially to this humidity. From the little I have seen of it, I
have been able to recognize that the diseases special to the region have no other cause and are
not determined by the presence, at the outset, of phlegm or raw humor. All diseases occur among
them at all times, as Hippocrates remarked; most of the diseases of the Egyptians are accidental
-- that is, they come from bilious or phlegmatic humors, according to the climatic state of the
country.

What we have said above demonstrates that if the morbid accidents are frequent, they have at least
among themselves an intimate relationship, and their appearance in a single year attenuates their
debilitating effects, thanks to the habit the inhabitants have acquired of them; a change in the
habitual conditions brings on diseases; to these changes from the normal conditions are inherent,
in my opinion, a multitude of morbid germs, foreign to the habitual variations of the climate. The
Nile does not make the bodies ill every year, but if its flood exceeds the mean and the inundation
prolongs itself beyond the normal time,

[PDF p. 164]

an epidemic breaks out. It has been asked whether the body of the Egyptians, being as weak as has
been said, is not always ill. To this we will answer that such is not our opinion, for disease
carries in itself its noxious action and does not act by an intermediary; the body of the Egyptian
is therefore not continually ill, but it becomes so with great ease. As for the local diseases of
Egypt, we have spoken sufficiently of them, and it is established that most of them are simple
morbid accidents that determine the mixture of bile and raw humor; the other diseases are due to
rapid and proximate causes and are particular to the end of autumn and the beginning of winter.

Of epidemic diseases. -- One gives the name of epidemic disease to that which spreads over the
generality of people in a single place and at the same time. One of them, named maouatan, is the
one that makes the most persons die. The origin of these diseases is due to multiple causes that
may be reduced to four categories: change in the state of the air; change in the state of the
water; change in the food; change in the state of the functions of the soul. The changes in the
state of the air are of two sorts: (1) normal change: this change brings no epidemic and is not
harmful; (2) abnormal change: that one produces the epidemic. It is the same for the three other
categories. There is an abnormal change in the state of the air when it is either too hot, or too
cold, or too humid, or too dry, or finally when there mix with it deleterious emanations that
corrupt it in turn. The cause of this change may be either near or distant, for Hippocrates and
Galen are of the opinion that nothing prevents an epidemic from breaking out in Greece resulting
from an agglomeration of miasmas formed in Abyssinia which, mixed with the air, arrives in Greece
and propagates the epidemic there. The air undergoes still further changes independent of its
normal variations at the arrival of considerable caravans; the people who compose them have the
body fatigued by the length of the journey, and the humors in bad state; there exhales from them
a quantity of emanations which, mixed with the air, communicate themselves to persons, and the
epidemic breaks out.

The water can equally be a cause of epidemic, if its quantity is too small or too great; there
mixes with it then a certain corruption, despite which

[PDF p. 165]

the people are obliged to drink it. The ambient air corrupts itself too. The cause of the
corruption of the water may be likewise either distant or near; the water, for example, may
traverse and bathe unhealthy places where numerous corpses are piled, or flow through hearths of
corruption. This corruption, carried by the water, mixes with it.

The food can be a cause of epidemic if the provisions, having become rare, are of too high a
price; in this case the generality of the people must feed on spoiled foods; or else, if the
people eat too much at a single time, as happens during festivals, the indigestion is then general
and everyone is stricken with the same disease; or else, again, the pastures where the animals
graze are corrupted, or the water they drink is altered.

The emotions of the soul can produce the epidemic when, for example, a whole people is subjected to
terror -- terror inspired by some invading king; one is agitated, the brain works to find some
means of escaping the tyrant, and thinks ceaselessly of the calamities that threaten. Digestion
alters, the natural heat undergoes repeated variations, and, despite this state, one is often
obliged to violent movements; or else, preoccupied with a dearth that is to occur some years
later, the people redouble their activity and movement, storing up provisions, and think
continually of the probable misfortune. All this determines in the bodies epidemic diseases that
extend to a great number of persons in the same country and at the same time. It is clear that if,
at the same time and in the same place, the diseases multiply, there escape from the bodies
abundant vapors that change the nature of the air, and if this air meets a well-disposed body, it
makes it ill in turn, even though this body had not been exposed to the same hardships as the
others.

The epidemics of Egypt always come from an abnormal corruption propagated by the air; this
corruption may be born in Egypt itself or come from neighboring countries, such as the Soudan, the
Hedjaz, Syria, or Barca; it may take its origin in the waters of the Nile which, too strong,
redouble the humidity and activate the corruption, and, too weak, leave the air drier than it
should be; in any case, the inhabitants are obliged to drink bad water bearing in it germs of
corruption gathered in hearths of contagion situated in Egypt [...]

[PDF p. 166]

or in the regions of the Soudan and elsewhere. Many people then die, and from the decomposed
corpses escape abundant vapors that alter the atmosphere, which, in turn, carries corruption to
others. The price of provisions rises, the grains are spoiled, the sheep or other beasts have some
disease. The deleterious miasmas carried by the water in its course, the rise in the price of
provisions, the alteration of cereals, the diseases that strike the sheep or other animals, a
terror or a general calamity -- these are so many causes that, in Egypt, can determine an epidemic
whose intensity is the stronger according as the determining cause is more or less grave. If the
causes are multiple, the scourge is more violent, makes more ravages, and kills more rapidly.

The climate of Egypt is hot and humid, but this latter state is only accidental; the most southerly
regions of Egypt are the hottest, and the water of the Nile is less unhealthy there than in the
northern region, especially in the part situated north of Fostat, such as the district of the
people of Bachmour; these are the coarsest people (of Egypt), and the stupefaction that predominates
among them is due to a very coarse diet and the use of unhealthy water.

As for Alexandria, Tanis, and other analogous towns, their situation near the sea, the attenuation
of the heat and the cold, the presence of the east wind -- all this renders them healthier; the
character of the inhabitants is gentler and, delivered from all care, they are far from being coarse
and heavy like the people of Bachmour. The town of Tanis, enveloped by the sea, has for its dominant
characteristic humidity, which softens the character of those who reside there.

The land of Egypt and all that is found there being weak of complexion and quick to alter and
corrupt, the physician must administer only newly prepared remedies, which still have all their
strength and are not affected by corruption; it is fitting also to prescribe remedies appropriate to
the state of the Egyptians' body (whose effect to be produced) should be slightly opposed to the
state of the patient; he will abstain from too-violent purgatives and from all energetic remedies in
general, because the bodies of the Egyptians are very weak and ready to fall ill; he will therefore
employ the purgatives and remedies whose force is most attenuated, so that they are not too much in
opposition with the nature of the Egyptians' body and that the latter are not too

[PDF p. 167]

affected by them. Let the physician beware of the remedies indicated in the books of the Greek or
Persian physicians, for most of their medicaments are prescribed for bodies of vigorous complexion
and magnificent constitution -- bodies that are met with only very rarely in Egypt. Thus the
physician would do well to abstain from these remedies; let him choose the gentlest of them, reduce
the dose, and replace some of their parts with another equivalent but gentler. Instead of honey, he
will employ syrup of vinegar, and jalap instead of honeyed water. Retain this well too: the air of
Egypt influences the electuaries and all the remedies and alters them. The medicaments, simple or
compound, electuaries or others, keep much less long in Egypt than in other countries. The
physician in Egypt must pay close attention to the dose and the kind of medicament he employs to
avoid any accident: if a purgative administered once does not suffice, it is better to begin again
after a few days than to apply at a single time a too-violent remedy. The climate of Egypt
debilitating the bodies and rendering them very apt to receive diseases, it follows that perfectly
healthy bodies are few there, the majority being composed of the rest, and among them real health
is never quite good health. The first precaution to take in Egypt to restore the bodies to a state
of health is to purify the air, the food, and the water, and to bring them back to absolute purity,
for in Egypt the first functions affected are those of digestion and the animal spirits; one must
therefore apply oneself to regularizing the functioning of the heart, the brain, the liver, the
stomach, the veins, and all the internal organs, to render the digestion normal, strengthen the
animal spirits, and rid the cavities of the impurities found there.

In the commentary on the fourth book of Ptolemy it is said: "As for all the regions that approach
the center of the inhabited quarter of the earth -- that is, the land of Barca, the shore of the
sea from Mariout to Alexandria, Rosetta, Tanis, Damietta, and Farama, the Delta of Egypt, the
environs of Memphis and Fostat, the part of the Said situated east of the Nile, the Fayoum, and all
the region west of the Nile to the most southerly point of the Said, the oases, Nubia, the land of
the Bedjas, the maritime region east of Nubia, Abyssinia -- all these countries occupy an angle that
extends its influence over all

[PDF p. 168]

the portion of the inhabited quarter of the earth situated between the north wind and the south wind
-- that is, the western half of this inhabited quarter, which the five planets together govern. The
inhabitants of this region worship God, venerate the genies, take pleasure in lamentations, bury and
hide their dead in the earth according to different rites; they have a great inclination for the
mysteries; each tribe occupies itself with some occult practice that everyone in this tribe
cultivates and puts to work; to these mysterious practices is due the invention, in the first times
of Egypt, of exact sciences such as geometry, astronomy, and others still, which from Egypt spread
into the world. Subject to foreigners, they are wretched and have for their dominant character
cowardice and astuteness. If foreigners are subject to them, they show themselves toward them full
of kindness and generosity. The men there take a great number of women, and the women on their side
take several husbands; very much given to coitus, the men have many children, and the women are
frequently pregnant. Many men, however, are weak and effeminate."

The inhabitants of Egypt, says Abou's-Salt, form a mixture of races and kinds, such as Copts,
Greeks, Arabs, Kurds, Dilemites, Abyssinians, etc., but the majority is Coptic. The reason for this
mixture is, it is said, the succession of (foreign) kings and conquerors who have possessed this
country -- Amalekites, Greeks, Romans, and others. This is why their genealogies are very mixed, and
the Egyptians distinguish themselves among one another only by the designation of their place of
origin and by the addition (to their name) of the name of their native country. In time past, it is
asserted, they worshiped the idols and frequented the (pagan) temples; Christianity appeared and
became the dominant religion of Egypt, whose inhabitants remained Christian until the conquest of
the country by the Muslims; a certain number of Egyptians then embraced Islam, the others remained
Christian.

What dominates in the character of the Egyptians is the love of pleasure, the propensity to
enjoyments, the love of futility, the belief in impossible things, weakness in resolution and
decision. They are extremely inclined to astuteness and cunning; from their birth they excel in it
and are very skillful in employing it, for there is in their character a foundation of flattery and
adulation

[PDF p. 169]

that has made them masters of it, more than all the peoples who have lived before or who will live
after them. Thus they reach a degree in it that is not found elsewhere; and their reputation in this
is so widely spread that proverbs have been made about their malice and their cunning. Abou Nouas
said:

    O Egyptians, I have given you my counsel sincerely,
        listen then a little to the counselor:
    The Commander of the Faithful has thrown you a serpent
        that will eat and drink the serpents of the country.
    For if there are still found among you the lies of Pharaoh,
        the rod of Moses is in the hand of Khasib.

The author resumes: I have already said that the sign of the Twins being at the zenith of the
inhabitants of Egypt, the Egyptians, for this reason, announce events before they have occurred,
know the future and things to come. There are on this subject among the Egyptians very well-known
legends. Ibn Et-Touaïer, speaking of the campaign of the Franks against the town of Tyre, recounts
that the guard and the garrison of this town returned to Ascalon, which did not cease to be
succored in warriors and vessels until the empire was little by little weakened by dissensions; the
defense of the town then became a painful charge for the army, and, the danger growing, they ceased
to occupy themselves with it; the Franks pressed the town so closely that they took it in the year
548, and I can certify that, many years before, I heard a man predict this event in these terms:
"In the year 8, Ascalon will surrender."

In the same order of ideas one may recall the affair of the destruction of the Christian churches.
It was executed on Friday, the 9th day of Rabi' el-akher of the year 721, when all were attending
the Friday prayer. One might believe that proclamations had been made in all the provinces of
Egypt, from Qous to Alexandria, for in all this extent of country a great quantity of churches were
destroyed at the same instant. This fact will be reported in its place in this book, when we speak
of the churches of the Christians.

To be cited again, in this connection, is the affair of Aldemer, which is this: the emir Aldemer,
commander of the guards, set out from Cairo in 730 to go on the pilgrimage. At Mecca a sedition
broke out in which Aldemer was killed on Friday, the 14th of the month of Dhu'l-Hijja; the same
day, the news was known at Cairo, at Masr, at the

[PDF p. 170]

Castle of the mountain, that a sedition had taken place at Mecca, in which Aldemer had met his
death. The news spread in the countryside of Egypt and became public the same day. En-Nacer
Mohammed ben Qalaoun paid no attention to it. But when the couriers arrived, after the normal time,
they recounted the affair and reported that the emir Seif ed-din Aldemer had been killed precisely
on the day when the news of it had been known at Cairo.

The author of the history of En-Nacer says: I was with the emir Elm ed-din El-Khazen in the
Gharbieh, where he had been sent as governor. After both having said the Friday prayer, we were
returning to his house, when one of his slaves, arriving from Cairo, announced to us that he had
learned that a sedition had taken place at Mecca, during which a great number of soldiers and the
emir Aldemer, commander of the guards, had been killed. "Has someone," asked the emir Elm ed-din,
"come from the Hedjaz bringing this news?" "No," said the slave. "Imbecile," resumed Elm ed-din,
"one cannot arrive from Mecca until three days after the festival of the immolation. How could you
have believed news that not even a sensible man would listen to?" "This rumor," said the slave,
"has been spread about." And the fact was indeed such as had been announced.

Here now is what happened to me, the author: In the month of Ramadan 791 [26 July to 23 August
1389], I was passing on the boulevard separating the two palaces, after nightfall. The crowd was
announcing that king Ez-Zaher Barqouq had come out of his prison at El-Karak and that the people
were coming to join him. I took note of this rumor; and it had circulated the very day Barqouq had
come out of prison. Many other affairs of this kind are recounted.

A point to note in the character of the Egyptians is that they are little jealous. To convince
oneself of this, it suffices to reread the passage of the Koran where it is a question of Joseph
and the attempts at corruption exercised on him by the wife of El-Aziz. A relative of this woman
deposed against her, which gave her husband the certainty that the crime came from her. He
nevertheless punished her no otherwise than by saying to her: "Ask pardon for your sin, for you
are guilty."

Ibn Abd el-Hakam recounts that after the Egyptians had perished in the waves with Pharaoh, there
remained in Egypt only slaves and servants [...]

[PDF p. 171]

for hire; but the women, not being able to do without men, set about -- some to free and marry
their slave, some to take their domestic for a husband -- imposing on the men the condition of
doing nothing without their permission; the men consented to it. The condition of the woman was
therefore superior to that of the man.

Ibn Lahiat told me he had it from Yezid ben Abou Habib that, even now, the Coptic women have the
same privilege as those who preceded them. No man can sell or buy without saying beforehand: "I
will ask my wife's permission."

It is recounted that after the disappearance of Pharaoh and the great ones of Egypt (in the Red
Sea), there was found in Egypt no one capable of being king. The ranks were therefore
distributed: the king's daughter was named queen, that of the vizier vizieress, the daughter of
the vali or governor occupied these same functions; likewise the daughters of the generals and
the warriors. These women governed the kingdom for several years and married their slaves,
agreeing with them that the government and the direction of affairs would remain with the women.
This is what took place for a long time. This is why the Egyptians are brown, for they descend
from the black slaves who, after the disaster of the Red Sea, united with the women of Egypt and
made them mothers.

The virtuous emir, in whom one can trust, Nasr ed-din Mohammed ben Mohammed ben El-Gharabili
El-Karaki, told me that since he has inhabited Egypt he has found the Egyptians of an amiable
character, tolerant toward their women, gentle and tender -- qualities they owe to their slight
jealousy. And we have always heard the proverb go around: "He who drinks the water of the Nile
forgets his homeland, if he is a foreigner."

One of the sides of the Egyptian character is never to concern himself with the future. He makes
no provisions of food like the inhabitants of other countries; everyone goes to fetch the
provisions each day at the market, morning and evening. Another of their traits is the love of
pleasure, the propensity to enjoyments, the search for frivolous amusements, and the absence of
reflection. Our sheikh, master Abou Zeïd Abd er-Rahman ibn Khaldoun, said this to me: "The
Egyptians act as if they were never to render accounts."

[PDF p. 172]

Omar ben El-Khattab, it is said, questioned Ka'b el-Ahbar about the customs of the various
countries and the character of their inhabitants. "When God," he answered, "created things, he
joined a second to each of them. 'I am going to Syria,' said Reason. 'I am going with you,' said
Rebellion. Abundance said: 'I am going to Egypt.' 'I accompany you,' said Resignation. 'I am
going to the desert,' said Misery. 'I am going with you,' said Health."

When God created the world, he also created, it is said, ten types of character: faith, honor,
courage, rebellion, pride, hypocrisy, wealth, poverty, humility, and misery. Faith said: "I will
go to Yemen." "I will accompany you," said Honor. Courage said: "I will go to Syria." "I will go
with you," said Rebellion. "I will go to Iraq," said Pride. "I will accompany you," said
Hypocrisy. Wealth said: "I will go to Egypt." "I will accompany you," said Humility. Poverty
said: "I will go to the desert." "I will go with you," said Misery.

According to Ibn Abbas, cunning comprises ten parts, of which nine for the Copts and one for the
rest of the world. It is said also that there are four things unknown respectively to four
peoples: generosity to the Greeks, frankness to the Turks, courage to the Egyptians, and duration
to the Zing.

Ibn El-Arabia, speaking of the Egyptians, says: They are slaves for whoever wishes to subdue
them; the most intelligent of men when they are small, they become the most ignorant of them as
soon as they are grown.

When Omar ben El-Khattab, says Maçoudi, subjected to the Muslims Iraq, Syria, Egypt, and other
countries still, he wrote this to a sage of his time: "We are the Arabs to whom God has subjected
the regions; we wish to make a halt on the earth and reside in the countries and the cities.
Describe to me, then, the countries, their climate, their inhabitants, and the influence of the
soil and the climate on the inhabitants." And the sage answered: "As for Egypt, it is a vast and
flat country, abode of the Pharaohs and dwelling of the valiant, to which one can address more
criticisms than praises. Its air is heavy and its heat intense; the harm there is such that it
darkens the complexion and the intelligence and pushes to crime. It is a mine of gold and gems, a
field of grains, but, if it fattens the bodies, it blackens the (hearts of) men; life there is
long; the inhabitants are full of cunning, malice, astuteness, finesse, and deceit. It is a
country where one can

[PDF p. 173]

enrich oneself, but not dwell, because of the rebellions that are continual there and the
calamities that frequently overwhelm it."

Omar ben Shebbah says: Ibn Obeïdah, in his History of El-Basra, asserts, on the authority of Ka'b
el-Ahbar, that the best women on the surface of the earth are the women of Basra (excepting, of
course, what the Prophet says of the women of the Qoreïchites), and that the worst women of the
earth are the women of Egypt.

Abd Allah ben Omar says: When Eblis was driven (from heaven), he set his foot on Basra and bred
young in Egypt. Egypt, says Ka'b el-Ahbar, is an impure land like the woman at the time of
menstruation, and each year it is purified by the Nile.

I have found, reports Moawiah ben Abou Safian, that the Egyptians divide into three categories:
one third are men, one third resemble men, and one third are not men. The first third, the men,
comprises the Arabs; the second third, those who resemble men, comprises the (former) masters;
and the third third, those who are not men, is composed of those who delivered up (Egypt) -- that
is, the Copts.

[PDF p. 174]

CHAPTER XIV
A FEW WORDS ON THE PARTICULARITIES OF THE NILE

Mouslim drew from the book of the Traditions of Anas, in the chapter concerning the ascension of
the Prophet, the following passage: "Then," said the Prophet, "there rose toward me the lotus of
the limit (cf. Koran, LIII, 14). Its fruits were like the hills of Hagar and its leaves like
elephants' ears. 'What is that, O Gabriel?' I asked. And the angel answered me: It is the lotus of
the limit, and here are the four rivers, of which two interior and two exterior. 'What is that, O
Gabriel?' I asked. The two interior rivers are the Nile and the Euphrates." It is written in the
Torah: And God created a Paradise in Eden and placed man there. And he made come out of Paradise
two rivers that he divided into four parts: Gihon, which surrounds the land of Havilah; Sihon,
which surrounds the land of Egypt, the same as the Nile of Egypt; the Tigris, which waters Iraq;
and the Euphrates.

Ibn Abd el-Hakam reports, on the authority of Abd Allah ben Omar, that the Nile is the lord of
rivers, to which God has subjected all the rivers, from the west to the east. If he wishes the
Nile of Egypt to flow, God orders all the rivers to feed it, and the rivers bring it their
waters. God has made come out of the earth springs that make the Nile flow where God wishes, and
when its course is finished, God orders the waters to return to their point of departure.

According to the account of Yezid ben Abou Habib, Moawiah ben Abou Sofian asked Ka'b el-Ahbar one
day: "Do you find mention of this Nile in the Book of God?" "Yes, certainly," answered Ka'b
el-Ahbar; "by him who opened the sea before Moses, I find in the Book that God, twice a year,
gives it orders and regulates its course, saying to it: God orders you to flow, and it flows as
much as God permits it, then he orders it next: O Nile, return in peace!"

There are, says Ka'b el-Ahbar, four rivers that come out of Paradise and that God has [...]

[PDF p. 175]

distributed throughout the world: the Nile, which is a river of honey in Paradise; the Euphrates,
which is of wine in Paradise; the Sihon, which is of water in Paradise; and the Gihon, which in
Paradise is of milk.

The Nile, says Maçaoudi, is one of the princes of rivers and one of the noblest among the rivers,
for it takes its source in Paradise, as the sacred Book teaches us. The same author says also:
When the Nile grows, the rivers, the springs, and the wells fall, and they increase when the Nile
falls. Its flood occurs by diminishing the other watercourses, and its fall corresponds with
their increase. The Nile of Egypt is the only river in the world to which one gives the name of
sea, because of its length and the depth of its waters.

Ibn Qoteïbah, in his Little-Known Traditions, relating the traditions concerning the Prophet,
expresses himself thus: "There are two believing rivers and two infidel rivers. The two believing
rivers are the Nile and the Euphrates, the two infidels are the Tigris and the river of Balkh."
The title of believers was given to the Nile and the Euphrates only figuratively, because both
inundate the soil and water the fields and the trees without fatigue and without effort; the
Tigris and the river of Balkh are two infidels, because they do not spread over the soil, and,
despite great fatigues and considerable efforts, they water only very little. The first two are
good and useful like the true believers; the other two, like the infidels, are neither useful
nor good.

[PDF p. 176]

CHAPTER XV
OF THE SOURCE OF THE NILE AND OF ITS COURSE

As we have said above, the Ocean that surrounds the inhabited earth, after having formed the sea
of India, divides into two parts: one of these parts takes the name of sea of the Zing, in the
vicinity of Yemen, and of sea of the Berbers. In this portion of sea are found a great number of
islands, among others the island of Qomr -- with a damma on the qof, a soukoun on the mim, and an
unpointed re; this island is also called the island of Mala-y; its length is four months' march
and its breadth twenty days and sometimes less; it faces the island of Serendib (Ceylon). One
meets there numerous villages, among others that of Qomryeh, which gave its name to the qomri bird
(the turtledove). One also finds, it is said, on this island a tree in which one can cut planks
sixty cubits long and that can shelter a hundred sixty men. This country having become too narrow
for its inhabitants, they built themselves dwellings on the continent, at the foot of the mountain
to which they gave their name and which was called the "mountain of Qomr."

All the mountains are branches of the mountain that surrounds the inhabited earth and that bears
the name of mountain of Qâf; this mountain is the mother of all the other mountains, which are
only branches detached from it. Continuous in places, in places interrupted, it resembles the
circle of which one does not know the point of departure, or a ring whose extremities one cannot
distinguish; it does not form a perfect circle, but it is named circular because it surrounds
(the world).

Some authors claim that the mountains are derived from two mother mountains: one, taking its
origin at the western Ocean, heads toward the south; the other, beginning at the sea of Roum,
heads toward the north; and both meet at the point named the Barrier; the southern mountain

[PDF p. 177]

bears the name of Qaf, and the northern mountain that of Qaqouna. But it is clear that a single
mountain surrounds the inhabited earth, and that it is the mountain of Qaf, known under this name
in the south and bearing in the north that of Qaqouna. This mountain starts from one of the sides
of the Barrier, passes beyond the statue of the cleft line, and prolongs itself to the point where
there detaches from it the branch in which is made the gate of China proper; it thus makes a point
toward the east of China, then, bending toward the south, it bars the East, along the Ocean sea,
leaving between it and the sea of India a vast territory; at the point of origin of the sea of
India, it cuts the equator under the 170th meridian, and reaches the branch of the Indian sea that
heads toward the sea of Darkness, to the southeast and well beyond the point of origin of the
southern Indian sea. These two branches -- the branch of the Ocean which, in the southwest of the
sea of Darkness, extends in the east-west direction, and the arm that forms the Indian sea heading
toward the sea of Darkness -- meet at the point of origin of the mountain like the two parts of a
pair of drawers. At the junction point of the two seas, the waters are divided into two parts
between which rises the mountain that seems to come out of the waters. [Footnote: this whole
passage is much corrupted in the Boulaq edition.]

The beginning of this mountain is then beyond and 15 degrees east of the Cupola of Arin. It bears
at its origin the name of El-Mogarrad (the bare one); it heads toward the west and ends at 65
degrees from the extreme west; it is there that from the principal massif detaches the branch of
Qomr, in which is the source of the Nile and where one meets those stones dazzling like polished
silver, to which has been given the name of "laughter of the astonished," for all those who look
at them are seized with such laughter that they cannot move away and die. This stone has also been
called the "magnet of men."

From the mountain of Qomr detaches a branch named Asiqi, whose inhabitants are like wild beasts;
then the mountain throws toward the west a second branch that prolongs itself to the Ocean sea and
is named the mountain of the Beasts, for it is peopled with lions furnished with long, formidable
horns. Beyond this branch, other chains detach from the mountain of Qomr; two of them head toward
the equator, hugging the bed [Footnote: the text erroneously reads "from the mountain of Qaf."]

[PDF p. 178]

of the Nile to the east and the west. The eastern chain, known under the name of mountain of
Qaqoul, breaks off at the equator; the western branch, named Admariah, is bathed by the Nile of
the blacks, also called the river of the Damadem; this mountain stops at the point where it meets
the plains of Abyssinia, between the towns of Safrah and Himi.

Beyond the point of birth of the mountain (of Qomr) reappears the mother branch, which sets out
again from the place already cited, whence detaches the mountain of Asiqi, and heads toward the
equator, which it reaches under the 20th meridian. There it takes the name of mountain of
Karasqabah and is peopled with ferocious beasts; from there it takes the direction of the Ocean
sea, but, before reaching it, throws a branch whose point of origin is beyond the Takrour, near
the town of Qalamtaboura. Behind this mountain dwell the negroes named Nemnem, who eat men. Then
the mother mountain approaches the sides of the sea of Roum, having Rome the Great to its
northeast, and runs parallel to the branch named Adamdamah, interrupted between Sama'rah and Himi,
but without passing it, as far as the 35th degree of longitude. This branch (Adamdamah?) rejoins
the mother branch at the 50th degree of latitude; likewise the branch that detaches from it in the
direction of the south cuts at its extremity the 50th meridian between Sardinia and Valencia. The
mother mountain reaches the Ocean, in the region of the north, facing the island of Britain,
Soussia (?), remaining on the near side of the mountain. Then, after slight breaks of continuity,
this mountain bends in curves that leave the Ocean sea to the west, approaches the land of the
Slavs, where the sea takes the name of sea of the Anfalash, and extends to the extreme east where
it is called mountain of Qaqouna, leaving behind it the sea that is always frozen because of the
extreme rigor of the cold. Then, making a bend from the north to the southeast, it approaches the
northern edge of the Barrier. It is between the two extremities of these mountains that
Dulqorneïn (Alexander) established his barrier.

In the region of Qomr there are three rivers: one flows to the east of the mountain on the side of
Qantourah and of Ma'la; the other, which heads to the west, comes out of the mountain

[PDF p. 179]

named Adam's Foot, reaches the town of Saba, waters that of Fardara, and, in the vicinity of this
last, forms a lake to the south of which is the town of Kima, peopled with black anthropophages
(cannibals); the third river, which also flows to the west, comes out of the mountain and,
following numerous detours, surrounds the town of Dahma and makes of Dahma a peninsula; this town
is indeed in a loop of the river that envelops it to the east, the south, and the west, which
renders it similar to a peninsula; (continuing its route) to the north, the river empties into the
sea of India; near its mouth and to the west of the river is situated the town of Qouarah.

From the mountain of Qomr comes out the Nile, whose waters formerly lost themselves at the surface
of the soil; but when Naqraouch the valiant, son of the first Misraïm, son of Markabil, son of
Douabil, son of Arbab, son of Adam, arrived in Egypt, followed by a great number of the Beni
Arbab, these peopled the region, built there the towns of Amsous and others, and dug the Nile,
whose water they directed toward the towns. The river previously had no regularity in its course;
it spread in pools over the soil, and its waters lost themselves. This state of things lasted until
the time when Naqraouch sent into Nubia an expedition that embanked the river and derived from it
numerous canals intended to water the new towns; among others, a canal that brought the water of
the Nile to the town of Amsous. Egypt having been overturned by the flood, Budchir, son of Qoft,
son of Masr, son of Bensar, son of Cham, son of Noah, put back into condition the banks of the
Nile destroyed by the cataclysm.

"Then," says master Ibrahim ben Ouacif Shah, "reigned Budchir, a valiant king, who was the first
to occupy himself with enchantments and magic, and made himself invisible to the eyes. His uncles,
Ashmoun, Atrib, and Sa, reigned each in his province, but Budchir subjugated them by his bravery
and his courage, and his renown surpassed, like that of his father, that of the kings who had
preceded him; he was therefore more powerful than his uncles, and these had to submit. It is
reported that he sent the Egyptian priest Hermes to the mountain of Qomr, from the foot of which
the Nile comes out. Hermes had as his mission to raise (at the sources of the river) statues of
bronze and to put into condition the lake into which the waters of the river pour. It was, it is
said, this priest who restored the two banks of the Nile, whose waters then lost themselves on the
soil and whose course was sometimes interrupted."

[PDF p. 180]

The palace where the statues were raised contained eighty-five figures set up by Hermes to gather
the water of the Nile by means of conduits and tubes through which the water flowed. On its exit
from the mountain of Qomr, the water entered the statue and came out by the mouth; Hermes then
established a scale carefully graduated in known cubits. All the water was thus brought back to the
different beds of the river, which led it to two lakes from which it came out again to empty into
another lake where all the waters issued from the foot of the mountain gathered. By means of these
statues, Hermes regularized the course of the river that was to bring to Egypt fertility and
well-being, and which thus became useful, from harmful as it was.

"The level of the waters had to reach, for them to be beneficial, eighteen of those cubits, each of
which contains thirty-two fingers. All the surplus was directed, by means of small channels, to the
right and left of the statues, and spread into the sands and across the countryside, beyond the
equator, where they were not used. Without this precaution, the waters of the Nile would have
submerged the country they water."

The same author adds: "El-Oualid, son of Darma, the Amalekite, set out with a numerous army, going
from country to country, subjugating their kings and seeking a dwelling to his liking. Arrived in
Syria, he heard of Egypt and the extent of its riches; he learned that the government had fallen
into the hands of women, its kings having perished. He therefore sent into Egypt one of his
servants named 'Oun, entered after him, treating the inhabitants according to his caprice, seizing
the riches and massacring a great number of priests. Then the idea came to him to visit the sources
of the Nile and to know the peoples who inhabited its banks. The preparations for the expedition
lasted three years, at the end of which he set out at the head of a considerable army, annihilating
the peoples through whom he passed. He thus crossed the land of the Blacks and, having passed it,
arrived at the region of Gold, where one sees stalks of gold coming out of the soil. Continuing his
march, he reached the lake into which empties the Nile formed by the waters that come out of the
foot of the mountain of Qomr. This is a very high mountain to which has been given the name of
Qomr-Gô because the Moon never rises there, the mountain rising beyond the equator. Budchir saw the
Nile coming out of the mountain and flowing by streams and small channels

[PDF p. 181]

to the two lakes from which it comes out again in two rivers that go to reunite in another lake.
After having passed the equator, the Nile receives as a tributary a river that comes from the
region of the river Mehran, in India, a river issued, too, from the mountain of Qomr, and which,
from the first, heads toward this side (toward the Nile). The river Mehran is, it is said, similar
to the Nile; it grows and decreases like it; like it, it is peopled with crocodiles, and the fish
one meets in it are similar to those of the Nile. El-Oualid, son of Dauma, found the palace of the
bronze statues built by the first Hermes in the time of Budchir, son of Qantarim, son of Qobtim,
son of Misraïm.

Some historians report that the four (primordial) rivers come out of a single source sheltered
under a cupola in the land of Gold, beyond the Tenebrous (Dark) sea. These four rivers are the
Sihon, the Gihon, the Euphrates, and the Nile. The land of Gold, according to these writers, would
be a portion of Paradise; the cupola would be of topaz (or emerald), and the four rivers, before
arriving at the Tenebrous sea, would be sweeter than honey and more fragrant than camphor. This
opinion is also that of one of the children of El-Aïs, son of Isaac, son of Abraham, who reached
this cupola and crossed the Tenebrous sea. This man was named Gaber. Others say that these rivers
divide into seventy-two parts that determine seventy-two different languages employed by the
peoples. According to others still, these rivers would be formed by ice that the heat makes melt;
the melted snow then flows into these rivers, whose ice waters the country they cross, according as
God judges it fitting for the good of his creatures.

Arrived at the mountain of Qomr, adds the historian, El-Oualid saw that it was a very high mountain
and used cunning to reach its summit and see what was behind it. He discovered a sea black as pitch
and stinking, and the Nile flowing toward the mountain in narrow streams. From this sea exhaled
miasmas that made a great number of El-Oualid's companions perish, and he, having nearly
succumbed, hastened to descend again. Some authors assert that down there one sees neither sun nor
moon, but only a reddish glow like that of the setting sun.

[PDF p. 182]

As for what is reported of Gaber, who crossed the Tenebrous sea without even wetting his feet, it
is explained by declaring that he was a prophet and that God had granted him wisdom. He had asked
God to see the sources of the Nile, and the necessary strength had been granted him. He marched, it
is said, for thirty years across inhabited countries, and twenty years across desert regions.

As for El-Oualid, his absence was, it is recounted, of forty years, after which, retracing his
steps, he returned to Memphis and remained in Egypt, treating the inhabitants as slaves, carrying
off the women, plundering the treasures. His reign lasted a hundred twenty years, during which he
was execrated and hated; but one day, having gone hunting, his horse threw him into a precipice;
El-Oualid was killed and the people were delivered of him.

Qodamah ben Ga'far, in his book Of the Taxes, says: "The Nile takes its origin at the mountain of
Qomr beyond the equator; there is a spring from which escape ten rivers; each group of five rivers
empties into a lake; from each lake come out two watercourses that pour into a single great lake
situated in the first clime. From this last lake, finally, comes out the Nile." The author of the
book entitled Charm of Those Who Love to Traverse the Horizons (Edrisi) says that this lake is
called lake Kouri, from the name of a tribe of negroes who inhabit its shores; these negroes are
savage and eat the men who fall into their hands. From this lake come out the river Ghana and the
river of Abyssinia. On its exit from the lake, the Nile crosses the land of the Kouris and that of
the Yanahs, negro tribes who live between Katem and Nubia. Arrived at Dongola, a town of Nubia, the
river makes a bend in the second clime; it is there that, on its two banks, extend the cultivated
lands of Nubia; one meets there great islands covered with towns and villages; then the river
resumes its course toward the east and heads toward the cataracts.

I have seen in the Geography (of Ptolemy), says Maçaoudi, a map showing the Nile coming out of the
foot of the mountain of Qomr; it is formed, at its origin, by twelve springs flowing toward two
lakes like the Ponds, then, coming out of these two lakes, the waters reunite, cross sands and
mountainous regions, and water the territory of the blacks beyond the land of the Zing, giving
birth to an arm that goes to empty into the sea of the Zing. The Nile flows at the surface

[PDF p. 183]

of the soil over a length of nine hundred parasangs, or a thousand parasangs according to another
opinion; it crosses fertile countries and sterile regions, inhabited countries and others that are
deserts, and finally arrives at Assouan in the Said.

In the book of Orosius, it is said that the Nile takes its origin in the regions of the sea of
Qolzoum and flows in the direction of the west; in the middle of its bed is an island, beyond which
it bends toward the north and comes to water the land of Egypt. It is said also that it draws its
origin from a spring situated beyond the mountain (of Qomr), that it loses itself in the sands to
reappear shortly after and form an immense reservoir; then that it skirts the Ocean sea across the
deserts of Abyssinia and, turning to the left, goes to water the land of Egypt. If its course is
such as is said, one must recognize that it is immense.

The river Nile is the one called (also) Baoun, whose source is hidden; but its presence in Abyssinia
is certain, and it there forms an immense reservoir into which it empties after a course of two
hundred miles. The author speaks (next) of the course of the Nile from its source to its mouths, and
he adds: One frequently meets crocodiles in the waters of the Nile; no one disputes that this river
comes from Abyssinia, and the evaluation of its length from its known point of origin to its arrival
at the sea is one hundred ninety thousand nine hundred thirty miles. The waters of this river are
turbid, sandy, sweet, and beneficent.

The cataracts where the Nile precipitates itself form the limit of the descending navigation of
Nubia and of the ascending navigation of the Said. They are strewn with sharp rocks that allow the
boats to pass only during the flood of the Nile; from this place, the river heads toward the north,
leaving to the east Assouan, right at the extremity of the Said, and flows between the two mountains
that bound the provinces of Egypt, situated one to the east and the other to the west; the course of
the river continues thus to the town of Fostat, situated on the eastern bank; but, a day's march
beyond Fostat, the Nile divides into two branches. One, which continues its course to the sea of
Roum, into which it empties near Damietta, bears the name of River of the East; the other, the
principal branch of the Nile, named River of the West, goes to empty likewise into the sea of Roum
near Rosetta, a town formerly considerable.

[PDF p. 184]

The length of the Nile, from its source to its mouth near Rosetta, is, it is said, seven hundred
forty-eight parasangs; in its course it crosses for four months desert regions, for two months the
land of the Blacks, and flows for one month in Muslim country.

Some authors claim that the flood of the Nile is due to the flux of the sea which, driving back the
waters of the river, forces them to spread over the soil. A book has been written on this subject,
which may be summarized thus: The movement of the sea called flux and reflux reproduces itself each
day twice, twice per lunar month, and twice per year. The daily tide is subordinate to the action
of the lunar disk, whose rays project onto the two banks of the mass of waters. When the moon is in
the middle of the sky, the tide reaches its maximum; it is the same when the moon is at the pivot of
the earth; a similar tide occurs again when the moon rises in the east and sets in the west. The
monthly tide occurs when the sun and the moon are in opposition in the middle of the month; this
tide takes the name of fullness; it occurs also at the moment of the conjunction (of these two
bodies) and then bears the name of joyous; this tide occurs again at the two periods when the sun
and the moon are in the same quarter of the sky, the 7th and the 22nd of each month.

The annual flux arrives equally at two periods: (1) when the sun is at the end of the constellation
of the Ear (Virgo), and (2) when it is at the end of the Whale; if these two periods coincide with
the moment of its opposition or its conjunction, there is a combination of the monthly fullness with
the annual fullness; it is then that the tide reaches its highest point, especially if the
conjunction occurs in the middle of the sky and if one of the planets is in the vicinity of the two
luminous bodies or of one of them, a circumstance that renders the tide stronger still. If one or
several planets are in conjunction with one of the two great bodies, the tide increases still in a
surprising way and, that year, the flood of the Nile is altogether extraordinary, and the river
Mehran increases too. But if the conjunction or the gathering occurs at a point far from the center
of the sky, and no planet is in the vicinity of one of the two bodies, neither the Nile nor the
river Mehran reaches the maximum of its flood, as a consequence of the diminution of the luminous
rays to which the swelling of the waters is due, and it is then for Egypt a year of [...]

[PDF p. 185]

dearth. The annual reflux takes place when the sun is at the beginning of the Capricorn and the
Cancer.

As for the daily flux produced by the Ocean sea, it exercises no influence on the seas issued from
it beyond the distance of one celestial degree, which represents about sixty terrestrial miles; it
is the same for the valleys whose soil is very low. The monthly flux makes itself felt to the
extremity of the seas (issued from the Ocean sea) and prevents them from flowing into the Ocean;
there where the influence of the flux ceases, there is the terminal point of that sea. The annual
flux, too, makes the seas issued from the Ocean sea swell by a notable quantity, and it is to this
increase (of the sea) that is due the flood of the Nile and its fullness, as well as that of the
river Mehran and of the delta of the land of the Sind.

When he came to Egypt with Alexander, Aristotle, after having examined the mouth of the Nile,
recognized as inadmissible the hypothesis that the bed of the river was, at Assouan, similar to the
rest of its bed; on the contrary, he was of the opinion that this bed went widening as it
approached the Delta, where finally, at the moment of the inundation, the river reached a width of
a hundred miles, and by numerous mouths threw back to the sea the unused excess of the waters; but,
recognizing also that the bed of the river could not be shaped in such a way that its lower part
was too narrow to contain what came to it from the top -- the base being always wider than the top
-- Aristotle emitted the opinion that the winds, blowing against the current of the river, drove
back its waters and thus caused the inundation. Alexander held it impossible that the winds drove
back the waters in the valley to the point of making them spread over an extent of more than a
hundred miles. And even if it were so (he said), the water would still escape below (the surface)
and flow to the sea, for the sea retains only the upper part of the water; but the winds accumulate
the sands at the mouth of the rivers at the point where they pour into the sea, and these sands
establish a kind of dam that makes the waters overflow. But Alexander forgot that sand is a friable
body through which the water can pass and continue its route toward the sea; moreover, the sand
could not accumulate so as to form a very perceptible obstacle, the waters of the river flowing
constantly through the mouths of Tanis and Damietta and those of Rosetta and Alexandria. These two
personages could not recognize that the inundation came from a

[PDF p. 186]

current that swelled of itself, and they attributed this overflow to the winds and the sands,
preoccupying themselves with the air and the earth but neglecting the third element, water, for
they were ignorant of the annual movement of the Nile and had been unable to realize that its daily
rise was almost imperceptible -- a circumstance that led the emir of Egypt to install in this
country meqias (nilometers).

All the tides are due to a single cause: the moon behaves with respect to water as the sun with
respect to the earth; the light of the moon falling on the terrestrial globe warms it, just as the
sun warms the atmosphere; the air, in contact with the water, receives a certain quantity of heat
that makes the water dilate, and it swells and overflows by its particular virtue; it is the same
effect as that produced by those burning mirrors that heat the atmosphere to the point of consuming
a wick of cotton placed between the mirror and the sun; it is the phenomenon of refraction, a
phenomenon found again in the conclusive (?) experiment of the bottle filled with water which,
struck by the solar rays, likewise inflames a wick of cotton. The moon is a transparent body that
the luminous rays traverse, as they traverse the bottle; if one (of these bodies) is struck by the
luminous rays, it heats the air surrounding the bottle or the earth, and the water stores up a
certain sum of heat that dilates it and makes it overflow. Such is the effect of the refraction of
the disk; and refraction is the projection of the rays that the moon sends back to a body situated
opposite it (?). Such is the constant cause of the tide; this phenomenon occurs conformably to the
circle traced by the firmament, a circle modeled on the one described by the firmament of the moon,
which in turn is traced according to the moon itself (?). The annual tide occurs when the moon
masks the sun or is occulted by it, for it occurs only in the cases of meeting of the sun and the
moon; it is weaker when the moon is in opposition and stronger when this planet is in conjunction;
it is the same if the moon approaches the middle of the terrestrial globe (zenith); the movement
(of the sea) is then more violent, and the limits of the waters and the lands merge. This is what
is called the annual tide.

[PDF p. 187]

CHAPTER XVI
REFUTATION OF THOSE WHO THINK THAT THE FLOOD OF THE NILE IS NOT DUE TO A TORRENT

The common people do not admit that the water that spreads over the soil comes from a torrent; but
looking only at the size of the river, the development of its mouths, the narrowness of its source,
taking account neither of the water, nor the earth, nor the air, they attribute the increase of the
waters to imaginary causes. This is what the author of the book Of the Roads and the Regions did,
who claims that the water comes to the Nile from all the points of the earth and all the countries
by underground roads, which brings on the flood of the river, and he explains it thus: The Nile
grows only at the time of autumn, when the water of the springs and wells diminishes, and the Nile
then increases. Considering the increase of the one and the diminution of the others, the second
has been made the cause of the first, relying on imaginary reasons. Among other reasons given to
prove that the flood of the Nile is not due to a torrent, it is claimed that the torrents form at
another period than that of the flux of the sea, when the Nile is not itself swollen, and, the sea
being in decrease, the torrents flow and discharge into the sea without meeting any obstacle.

Another reason: The Nile grows gradually during the three months that the sun employs to go from
the initial point of the Cancer to the terminal point of the Ear (Virgo). Thus it is possible to
calculate the intensity of its flood two months before it is complete, and (for this purpose) the
governor of Egypt has at his disposal, in the middle of the river, a nilometer consisting of a
column graduated in cubits, which allows him to know the daily elevation of the waters.

Another reason: The flood of the Nile always occurs at the same period; now, if it were due to a
torrent, there would be some variation.

[PDF p. 188]

Another reason: The torrents appear at another period without the Nile growing.

Another reason: The instructed Egyptians, seeing the heat become excessive, are sure that the Nile
will increase, for the great heats make the air dilate, which in turn makes the water dilate; and
this occurs only because of the meeting of the planets and the increase of the light.

Another reason: The bed of the river at Assouan is only a narrow channel that widens as it
approaches the sea and ends by reaching nearly a hundred miles in extent. Assouan being the extreme
point where the driving-back (of the waters by the tide) makes itself felt, what should one think
of a river fifteen days (of march) long that would present no relationship between its upper course
and its extreme lower course? What should it be at its upper part if it presents such a mass of
water at its lower part?

Another reason: The inhabitants of Assouan make constant observations at the extreme point of the
driving-back, watching the river continually during the day; during the night they put a light in a
vessel of earth that they place on a stone for this use, and observe it. If the light is
extinguished by the rising water, they are certain that the driving-back has reached its extreme
point, which they know in advance; and they begin to take the water necessary for irrigation. Then
the emir has the barriers established at the intakes of the canals broken, and the water spreads
over the land of Egypt all at once.

Another reason: All these canals are obstructed, at their intake on the Nile, by heaps of wood and
earth that retain in the bed of the river the sweet water found there; thus the water of the river
increases in volume, rendering possible the irrigation of all the lands of Egypt, and preventing by
its mass the invasion of the salt water. If the flood were due to a torrent, these precautions would
be useless, and the barriers of the canals would be opened from the appearance of the torrent.

Another reason: If the canals were closed, supposing there were no driving-back caused by the sea,
the torrent, following the bed of the river, would flow toward the sea, since the delta of the Nile
is wider and lower than the upper course of the river.

Another reason: The water of the sea advances more than twenty miles into the passes of Rosetta,
Tanis, and Damietta, as it does moreover in all the valleys

[PDF p. 189]

where the influence of the flux and reflux makes itself felt. If the bed of the Nile were empty of
sweet water, the sea would rise to Assouan, the extreme point of the driving-back, for water
naturally seeks the lowest places of the earth, which is similar in its form to a perfect sphere all
of whose radii, drawn from the center to the envelope, are equal.

Another reason: When the barriers are broken and, the canals being open, the water spreads over all
the low parts of Egypt, the inhabitants of Assouan perceive it at that very instant, and at that
moment they say: "The canals have been opened and the water has spread over the land of Egypt"; they
recognize this by the level of the water, which falls all at once. If it were a question of a
torrent, those who are on the upper course of the river would say: "The rain has ceased on the land,
the rain that gave birth to the torrent."

Another reason: The arm of the river that crosses Abyssinia and which, like the Nile, comes out of
the mountain of Qomr, does not have a flood that lasts three months like that of the Nile, and its
waters do not stay on the soil as long as those of the Nile. If it happens that a torrent empties
into it, this river waters its banks as far as they extend in plain, and, if the (liquid) matter
comes to fail, the waters regain their bed. Now, if the Nile were swollen by a torrent, the two
rivers, having the same origin, would be in identical conditions, and we would not have to say that
the flood of the Nile is due solely to the driving-back produced by the flux of the sea -- since, if
it were really a question of a torrent, the driving-back caused by the sea would be like that which
one can observe in the other neighboring countries, (that is to say) that, as soon as there were no
more torrent, the coast would be invaded by the sea, which ordinarily gains on the shores.

The Egyptians are in ignorance on the subject of the flood of the Nile because they have not seen
its sources and have been unable to observe its origin at the mountain of Qomr, the latter being
situated in uninhabited country. It has not been possible for them either to realize the annual tide,
cause of the driving-back of the waters, nor to determine anything whatever of what concerns this
river, for it is beyond the reach of the common people to understand that the sea swells during the
days of summer, since habitually they see this swelling occur during the winter. This winter tide is
due simply to the winds that blow from one of the banks of the sea, make the waters swell, which
overflow on the opposite bank [...]

[PDF p. 190]

opposite. It is not the same for the Ocean sea, which is perpetually agitated from the center toward
the shore, for the Ocean, by its nature, tends to invade the surface of the earth, but the latter,
of uneven form, opposes by its very form this invasion of the Ocean, which ceaselessly seeks to rise
on the surface of the earth and spread over its shores. The strong tides are due to the abundance of
the luminous rays: indeed, if the sun and the moon are in conjunction with planets, the flux of the
sea becomes stronger, and, if this flux becomes stronger, the rivers overflow in their turn;
likewise, when the moon is in the vicinity of a planet, the vapors rise, mount into the circle of
cold, and resolve into rains. If, on the contrary, the moon is far from the planets, the rain ceases
as a consequence of the abundance of evaporation, as happens in the middle of the day, when the sun
is at the zenith and the great planets hold themselves in the middle of the line of Arin. And God
knows best how it is!

From all that has just been said it emerges clearly and as an incontestable fact that the Nile takes
its source at the mountain of Qomr; but it is quite otherwise for the opinion that would have the
flood of the Nile be due to the driving-back produced by the flux of the sea penetrating into the
bed of the river. Certainly, the continual blowing of the north wind on the enormous mass of the sea
at the moment of the tide, as well as the driving-back this mass produces, contribute to making the
flood of the Nile stronger, but if one examines the Nile attentively, one realizes easily that a
torrent has passed into its bed; during all the winter, indeed, and the first part of spring, its
waters remain always clear and limpid; but, as soon as the time of the flood is past and when the
river reaches its lowest level, the taste of the water alters, its color becomes greenish, and if one
puts a small quantity of it in a vessel, there is deposited at the bottom of this vessel a kind of
scum; here is the cause of this phenomenon: the marshes situated in the extreme south receive the
visits of elephants and other animals that corrupt their waters; during the summer, at the moment
when the rains of the south become abundant, the torrent rushes toward these marshes and makes them
overflow; the corrupted parts rise at the same time as the level of the water and are carried toward
Egypt. It is said at this moment that the Nile has its cravings; this state of the river lasts until
the moment when these waters are replaced by waters made turbid

[PDF p. 191]

which by their abundance render the river turbid. If, at the time of the flood, one puts this water
in a vessel, there forms in it a deposit of silt that one could not find outside the time of the
inundation. This silt is carried by the torrent that rolls toward the Nile and produces the
inundation; it is this silt which, after the fall of the waters, receives the sowing; where it is
not deposited, the land of Egypt remains salty and sterile, and there are no possible harvests except
in the terrains that have been covered by the water of the Nile and on which this silt has been
deposited.

The objection drawn from the fact that if the torrent occurs at another period than that of the tide,
the Nile does not grow -- precisely as a consequence of this low level of the sea, which allows the
torrent to empty into it without meeting any obstacle -- this objection is unacceptable; indeed, the
torrents to which the flood of the Nile is due are habitually produced by the abundant rains that fall
in the south; now these rains fall only during the summer season, so the Nile has never been seen to
grow during the winter. The best proof that this flood is indeed due to a torrent emptying into the
Nile is that this river increases gradually by a quantity equal to that which the torrent brings it.

The argument based on the nature of the Nile's course at Assouan, and the widening of its basin at the
frontier of the Delta, is easily eliminated if one observes that the Nile flows vertically through a
gorge narrowed between two mountains named Genadel (the cataracts), and then over the soil to the sea,
and, if it widens, it is because it meets no obstacle that prevents it from spreading.

The opinion that would have it that as soon as the barriers (of the canals) are broken the water
spreads over the lands all at once is false too: indeed, at the rupture of one of the barriers, the
water enters a canal; the channels are then opened that go from one canal to another across the
terrains that border them and that they water; of these terrains, some are rapidly irrigated, others
are so after a certain number of days; others, finally, cannot be, because of their elevation. It is
claimed that the canals are closed, at the moment when the Nile begins to rise, in order to gather
into a single mass the water of the Nile, make it increase and spread over all the lands, and prevent,
by the resistance of this mass, the invasion of the river's bed by the water of the sea. This is not
admissible, and the dikes are not such as is said: the terrains of Egypt divide, indeed, into numerous
categories: some, very elevated, are watered only

[PDF p. 192]

in exceptional floods; others, very low, are covered during the weakest floods, and, between the too-
elevated terrains and the too-low terrains, there exist some of intermediate altitudes; thus one is
obliged to dig canals in the Said and raise dikes in the Delta, in order to direct the waters and
render possible for the inhabitants of each region the suitable irrigation of their crops; without
this, certain lands would be too watered and others not at all. This is what makes one draw from the
Nile the water necessary for the irrigation of the lands before the moment of sowing. It is habitually
in Mesori that the Khalig (canal) is opened; the water penetrates it and rises to a sluice, where it
stops until the lands situated below the level of the water held in this canal have been watered; then
the sluice is opened on the day of the Nourouz, and the water extends to another sluice where it is
again stopped to permit the watering of the terrains situated below its level. This second sluice is
opened in its turn on the day of the festival of Salib, seventeen days after the Nourouz; the water
gains a third barrier where it is again stopped to permit the irrigation of the lands situated below
its level; finally, this last barrier being opened, the water goes farther to water other lands and
finally empties into the sea. Such is the functioning of the barriers of the land of Egypt.

As for saying that the water of the sea rises more than twenty miles into the passes of Rosetta,
Tanis, and Damietta, and that, if it did not find sweet water in the Nile, the water of the sea would
reach Assouan, the extreme point of the driving-back -- this assertion is that of a man who would not
know Egypt. The course of the river, indeed, is more elevated at Assouan, where the altitude reaches
several heights of men above the level of the river's mouth. If the water of the sea swells, it puts
an obstacle to the flowing of the river; the two masses of water drive each other back reciprocally,
and sometimes the sea prevails over the Nile when this river is at its lowest ebb, so much so that it
salts the water of the Nile from Damietta to Faraskour. But, at the moment of the flood, I, for my
part, was witness to the flowing of the river's waters into the sea at Damietta, and yet the two
masses of water opposed each other and mutually obstructed each other; there is a proof for whoever
seeks one.

To suppose that at the moment when the dikes are broken, the inhabitants of Assouan perceive it on the
instant, is an inadmissible hypothesis. During long

[PDF p. 193]

years, indeed, we have seen the Khalig cut and some channel opened; now the water submerges
considerable terrains without one being able to perceive that the river diminishes, anywhere but at
the very place of the canal's intake, and the crier of Qous continues to cry that the Nile is at its
full; at that moment at Qous the water reaches a height of sixteen cubits, a height that is reached by
the waters, at the meqias of Cairo, only three days after, or thereabouts.

What is said of the branch of the Nile that crosses Abyssinia and of the difference of its regime with
the regime of the other Nile is not exact either. On the contrary, the period of the flood of the Nile
of Egypt coincides with that of the flood of Nubia and the more southerly countries; there are between
these two rivers only two points by which they differ: (1) in Egypt, the Nile flows in a sunken bed,
while down there it spreads over (level) lands; (2) the flood is determined in Egypt by means of
meqias, down there it is impossible to calculate it, because of the dispersion of the waters.

He who has studied the history of Egypt knows that the flood of the waters of the Nile is produced by
the southern rains.

The Nile, it is said, is formed of ten rivers that come out of the mountain of Qomr of which we have
spoken above; these ten watercourses form two groups of five rivers each and go to empty into two
lakes, each bundle of five rivers pouring into a lake. From the eastern river detaches a thin river
that heads toward the east, skirting the mountain of Qaqouli and, after having bathed the towns
situated in this region, empties into the sea of India. (Moreover), from the two lakes come out six
rivers, three from each lake, and the six rivers reunite in an immense lake named El-Batihat (the
marsh), from which rises a mountain that divides the waters into two branches; one of these branches,
which sets out from the west of the lake of El-Batihat, is the Nile of the Soudan, which becomes the
river known under the name of river of the Damadem; it takes the direction of the west, passes between
Samghrat to the north and Ghanat to the south, throws at this point a branch that heads to the south
on the side of Ghanat, then, passing near Barnessah, it skirts the foot of the mountain situated south
of this town, crosses the equator at the height of Zafilah, and empties into a lake found in the
vicinity; the branch (of Ghanat) heads likewise toward the west, passes to the land of Malaï and
Takrour, and ends at the Ocean, north of the town of Qalbafou. The other half (of the waters

[PDF p. 194]

of El-Batihat), escaping from the north of the lake, takes the direction of the north and passes to
the east of the town of Himi. At this place, from this branch detaches a branch that flows toward the
east and, arrived at the town of Sahrat, returns toward the south to straighten toward the southeast,
heading toward the town of Sahrata, then toward the town of Markah; this branch terminates at the
equator in a lake. Beyond the birth of this last branch, to the east of the town of Himi, the
principal branch, under the name of "column of the Nile," takes the direction of the north, skirts
the frontiers of Abyssinia, then, running straight to the north, crosses the land of the blacks,
reaches the town of Dongolah, precipitates itself into the cataracts at Assouan, and from the foot of
these cataracts waters the land of the Said as far as the town of Fostat-Masr; finally, continuing its
course, it goes to empty into the sea of Syria. It is commonly believed in the Soudan that the Nile
descends from black mountains which, from afar, seem crowned with clouds, then that it divides into two
rivers, one of which empties into the Ocean, in the southern part of the sea of Darkness, while the
other bathes Egypt and empties into the sea of Syria. It is said that, in the extreme south, it
divides into seven rivers that penetrate into the uninhabited desert, then, reuniting, form no more
than a single one in the Soudan.

[PDF p. 195]

CHAPTER XVII
OF THE MEASURING OF THE NILE AND OF ITS FLOOD

Ibn Abd el-Hakam says that Joseph was the first to measure the height of the Nile, by establishing a
nilometer at Memphis. Then the old Dalouka, daughter of Zeba -- the same who built the Wall of the
Old Woman -- had raised at Antinoe a nilometer graduated in small cubits, and another at Akhmim. Abd
el-Aziz ben Merwan established one at Helouan, graduated in small cubits. Under the caliphate of
El-Oualid, Osama ben Zeïd el-Tannoukhi had a nilometer raised in Gezireh; it is the largest of all.

"I saw," says Yahia ben Bakir, "the man charged with this service take the height of the river at the
nilometer of Memphis and bring to Fostat the figure of the cubits."

According to El-Qoda'i, the first to measure the height of the Nile in Egypt was Joseph; to this
effect he built the nilometer of Memphis, the first nilometer raised by Joseph; in Egypt, it is said,
the Nile was measured in the land of Alaouat until the time when the nilometer of Memphis was built,
which was employed by the Copts until the moment of its destruction. After Joseph, the old Dalouka
raised two nilometers, one graduated in small cubits at Antinoe and the other at Akhmim. The wall
that goes around Egypt is also her work. Before the establishment of the nilometers, the height of
the waters was measured with the sounding line. Until the moment of the conquest, the nilometers
continued to serve for the measuring of the waters, and traces of them subsisted as long as the
Muslims had not executed the constructions that rise between the fortress and the river. The Greeks
likewise made use of the nilometer established in the palace, behind the gate and to the right in the
corridor. There are still vestiges of it, but they are covered and surrounded by constructions.

At the moment of the conquest of Egypt, Amr ben el-As raised a nilometer at Assouan, then another in
a locality named Denderah, and finally, under

[PDF p. 196]

the caliphate of Moawiah, a third at Antinoe; this last remained in use until Abd el-Aziz ben Merwan
had built a nilometer at Helouan, where he resided; this nilometer was graduated in small cubits. As
for the nilometer of Gezireh, Ousama ben Zeïd, who had built it, spent on it, it is said, two thousand
ounces. [Footnote: the ounce is worth 12 dirhems.] It was he too who raised the House of the Treasury
at Cairo. Later Ousama ben Zeïd el-Tennoukhi, intendant of the revenue of Egypt, informed Soliman ben
Abd el-Melek of the bad state of this nilometer, and Soliman answered him to build a new one on the
island, which was done in the year 97 [5 September 715 to 24 August 716]. At the beginning of the year
247 [17 March 861 to 6 March 862], when Yezid ben Abd Allah el-Turki was governor of Egypt,
El-Motawaqqel had the great nilometer built that is called the new nilometer, and prescribed to take
from the Christians the charge of measurer of the river. Yezid ben Abd Allah el-Turki therefore
established as the one in charge of the nilometer Abou-l-Raddad, who was surnamed El-Mo'allem, but
whose true name was Abd Allah ben Abd el-Salam ben Abd Allah ben Abou-l-Raddad el-Muezzin. He was,
according to El-Qomi, originally from Basra, and came to Egypt where he explained the traditions.
Named director of the nilometer, he was allotted a monthly salary of seven dinars by Soliman ben
Ouahb, then intendant of the revenues of Egypt. From this period and until the present, the direction
of the nilometer has remained in the hands of Abou-l-Raddad and his descendants. Abou-l-Raddad died
in the year 266 [23 August 879 to 11 August 880]. In the year 259 [7 November 872 to 26 October 873],
Ahmed ben Touloun, accompanied by the intendant of the treasury Abou Ayoub and the cadi Bekar ben
Qoteiba, went to examine the nilometer and ordered it repaired, fixing for this repair the sum of a
thousand dinars.

El-Harets also built in Sana'at a nilometer of which there remain now only insignificant traces.

"After the conquest of Egypt by Amr ben el-As, the inhabitants, according to what Ibn Abd el-Hakam
reports, came at the beginning of their month of Boona to Amr and said to him: O emir, our Nile is
accustomed to a certain custom; if one departs from it, its flood will not take place. And what is
this custom? asked

[PDF p. 197]

Amr. It is necessary, they said, that on the twelfth night of this month we take a young girl from
her parents, whom we will then indemnify, and, after having covered her with jewels and the richest
garments, we will throw her into the river. That, said Amr, is not possible under Islam, for Islam
has annihilated all that existed before it." And the Egyptians passed the months of Boona, Abib, and
Mesori without the Nile growing in any way; finally, they were thinking of emigrating when Amr,
informed of their project, wrote about it to Omar ben El-Khattab, who answered him: "You did well to
say that Islam has annihilated all that existed before it. On receipt of my letter, throw into the
river the note I send you." And having received the letter, Amr opened the note, which was conceived
thus: "From the servant of God, Commander of the Faithful, to the Nile of Egypt. If it is by your own
will that you produce the inundation, cease to produce it. But if it is the one and all-powerful God
who makes you grow, we ask God, the one and all-powerful, that he make you swell." This note was
thrown into the Nile, on the eve of the festival of the Cross, when the Egyptians were preparing to
leave and quit the country, for their only reason to stay was the Nile. And the next day, the day of
the festival of the Cross, on their waking, God had made the Nile grow sixteen cubits during the
night. It is thus that this barbarous custom disappeared from Egypt. It was, it is said, Gahel
el-Sadfi who carried Omar's note to the Nile, then stationary, and which swelled by God's order.
According to Yezid ben Abou Habib, Moses having implored God against the family of Pharaoh, Moses
stopped the Nile, to such a point that the Egyptians thought of leaving the country and begged Moses
to address prayers to God. Moses prayed, hoping the Egyptians would believe; it was the eve of the
festival of the Cross. And the next morning, when the Egyptians woke, God had made the Nile grow, at
that moment, sixteen cubits. In his goodness, God granted the prayer of Omar ben El-Khattab as he had
granted that of his prophet Moses.

"I," says El-Qodaï, "found what follows in a small writing attributed to El-Hassan ben Mohammed ben
Abd el-Mona'm: After the conquest of Egypt by the Arabs, Omar ben El-Khattab realized the
consequences that drought could entail for the country, when the Nile does not reach in the nilometer
a determined level and remains below this level. Through excess of foresight, the inhabitants hoard
the provisions, and this hoarding brings on a

[PDF p. 198]

general rise in prices that maintains itself even if the dearth does not take place. Omar therefore
wrote to Amr and asked him for some information on the situation. Here is what Amr answered: "I have
ascertained that, for an irrigation sufficient and capable of keeping dearth away from Egypt, the
Nile must reach fourteen cubits; but for all the lands to be watered, the harvests to give the maximum
and suffice even for the following year, the Nile must reach sixteen cubits; above and below these two
points, there is danger of drought or inundation; drought if the Nile does not exceed twelve cubits,
for it is too low, and inundation if it reaches eighteen, for then it is too high. When it was
delivered up by the Copts, the country was furrowed with canals and furnished with dikes, and the
leaven of prosperity was in it." The Commander of the Faithful, having taken counsel of Ali on this
subject, the latter engaged him to write to Amr to observe the following prescriptions in building his
nilometer: to make two supplementary cubits with the first twelve of which it was a question, to leave
the (two) following cubits as they were, and to remove two fingers from each of the cubits above the
sixteenth. Amr conformed to these prescriptions and thus obtained a most reassuring nilometer by
making fourteen cubits of the first twelve. Each cubit is composed indeed of twenty-eight fingers; Amr
gave the first twelve cubits twenty-four fingers, which left an excess of forty-eight fingers -- that
is, of two cubits. The fourteenth took the number 16 and the sixteenth the number 20. "One must," says
El-Qodaï, "take good account of this today, now that the river has changed and its state has been
profoundly altered. Thus the old nilometers of the Said, from the first to the last, are graduated in
cubits of twenty-four fingers (twenty-eight) and the nilometer established under Islam is such as has
just been described. As for the one erected by Ousama ben Zeid el-Tennoukhi in Gezireh, it has been
carried away by the waters. El-Mamoun built another in the Delta at a place named Barouzat, and one
last was raised in Gezireh by El-Moutawaqqel; it is the nilometer still in use today and of which we
have spoken above.

According to Ibn Afir, the old Egyptians claim that if, on the 12th of Mesori, the water of the Nile
reaches twelve cubits, the year will be good; if not, the waters will remain low. If, before the
Nourouz, the water reaches sixteen cubits, the Nile will be at its maximum; know this well.

[PDF p. 199]

Abou-l-Salt, concerning the origin of the Nile, says: This river takes its origin beyond the equator
and comes out of a mountain situated in those regions and known under the name of mountain of Qomr.
The waters begin to grow during the month of Abib, and the Egyptians commonly say: "When Abib begins,
the water makes noise." At the beginning of the flood, the nature of the river alters and corrupts;
the reason for this is that it crosses pools of stagnant water with which it mixes and which it carries
with it toward other similar marshes whose waters mix again with its own in part. As soon as the water
exceeds fifteen cubits -- even if it enters only by a finger into the sixteenth -- the Khalig is cut;
it is the occasion of a solemn ceremony and a public festival; the common people as well as the great
ones attend it, gathered in a determined place. As soon as the Khalig is cut, the dikes that close the
entrance of the canals are knocked down; the water spreads, extends, and covers the plains and the
low-lying grounds. The people of the villages gather at the tops of their houses and in dwellings the
water cannot reach and out of the torrent's range. In this way the whole land of Egypt resembles a
sea, and the waters, as long as the will of God maintains them at the necessary level, cover all the
space between the two mountains. The highest waters reach about eighteen cubits; then they begin to
fall and regain the bed of the Nile, abandoning first the highest lands and last the lowest, and
leaving each village like a dirhem and the plain like a variegated mantle.

In his book Of the Royal Maxims, El-Qoda'i Abou'l-Hassan Ali ben Mohammed El-Mawardi informs us that
the black cubit is a finger and two thirds longer than the building cubit. It was instituted by the
Commander of the Faithful Haroun al-Rachid, who made it equal to the length of the arm of a black
slave who stood near him. It is this cubit that is used for the measuring of silk, merchandise,
edifices, and for the measure of the height of the Nile.

The highest measure recorded at the nilometer, below the line of the mean level, was in the year 197,
the period when the Nile reached only nine cubits and twenty-one fingers, and the lowest in the year
165, when it did not exceed one cubit ten fingers. The greatest height reached by the river above the
mean level was eighteen cubits and nineteen fingers in 199, and the [...]

[PDF p. 200]

lowest, above this same level, twelve cubits and nineteen fingers in the lunar year 356, in the time
of Kafour El-Akhshidi.

The nilometer is a column of white marble of octagonal form, erected in a place where the water
penetrates and from which it freely exits. This column is divided into twenty-two cubits, each
subdividing into twenty-four fingers, with the exception of the first twelve, which are each of
twenty-eight fingers. [Footnote: it is evidently the opposite that must be read, if one refers to
what was said above. Each of the cubits of the nilometer is of twenty-eight fingers, with the
exception of the first twelve, which have each only twenty-four fingers.]

According to El-Maçoudi, the Indians claim that the flood of the Nile and the retreat of its waters
are caused by torrents, but we know that they are due to the continuity of clouds and the abundance
of rains.

The Greeks are of the opinion that the Nile never increases nor diminishes, but that its flood and
its fall come from its sources increasing or drying up.

The Copts assert that the flood and the fall of the waters are due to springs that gush on one or the
other bank, whose presence the travelers who have visited the upper river have been able to
ascertain.

Others claim that the Nile does not increase, and attribute its flood to the violence of the north
winds that prevent the river from emptying into the sea and consequently force it to spread over the
surface of the soil. Others, finally, estimate that this flood is due to the persistence of certain
winds named the winds of Moltan, which carry the rain-clouds to the other side of the equator; the
rain then falling in the Soudan, in Abyssinia, and in Nubia, the mass of these waters arrives in the
land of Egypt and the Nile increases. Moreover, the sea stops the water of the Nile and retains it
until it has watered the country. And on this subject it has been said:

    Listen (for he who listens to me is a benefactor
        to me, and greater than he who showers me with presents):
    The Nile is full of qualities, but
        one must thank the Moltan for them.

The Nile begins to grow at the end of the month of Boona, which corresponds to Haziran; its rise
continues during the month of Abib, corresponding to Tammouz, and of Mesori, corresponding to Ab;
and even, if the Nile is in good

[PDF p. 201]

growth, it continues to rise during the whole month of Thot, which corresponds to Eilul. If the level
of the waters reaches eighteen cubits, all the taxes must be collected, for the land will be fertile.
But this state of the soil is harmful to the livestock because of the absence of meadows and grasses.

To be profitable to the generality of the country, the inundation should reach a height of seventeen
cubits; in this case, all the lands would be watered. If this height is exceeded and the flood reaches
eighteen full cubits, a quarter of Egypt is submerged; certain villages may be destroyed, as we have
said above, because of the abundance of the waters. If the eighteen cubits are exceeded, the
consequence is that on the retreat of the Nile's waters, epidemics break out, and most floods reach
eighteen cubits.

Under the caliphate of Omar ben Abd el-Aziz, the Nile reached only twelve cubits. The length of the
first twelve cubits is twenty-eight fingers each, the cubits above the twelfth being each of
twenty-four fingers. The lowest height of the water that remains in the nilometer at low ebb is three
cubits; in the year when this fact occurs, the inundation will be very weak. The cubits for which
public prayers are made are named Mounkir and Nakir; they are the thirteenth and fourteenth cubits: if
the Nile, exceeding these two cubits, reaches the half of the fifteenth, the Egyptians make public
prayers, for the whole country is threatened with calamities; but if, the fifteenth cubit being
complete, the Nile penetrates into the sixteenth, it is a benefit for a part of the inhabitants and
public prayers are no longer made; this fact nevertheless brings a diminution in the revenues of the
sultan.

The wine that is drunk in Egypt is prepared with the water of the month of Tobe, which corresponds to
Kanoun II; it is the time when the water of the Nile is in the greatest state of purity, and the time
too when the Egyptians boast of the limpidity of the waters of their river. At this moment, the
inhabitants of Tennis, of Damietta, of Tounah, and of all the maritime villages lay in a provision of
water.

Formerly a flood of sixteen cubits sufficed to water the uncultivated and cultivated parts of all
Egypt, thanks to the good upkeep of the dikes and sluices and the dredging of the canals. The water,
in a flood of only nine cubits, entered the canals of El-Manha, of Fayoum, of Sardous, and of Sakha.
The usage

[PDF p. 202]

at present -- that is, in the year 345 [15 April 956 to 3 April 957] -- is that, if the Nile maintains
itself immediately above sixteen cubits or reaches a level below this point, the revenue of the sultan
is diminished; but at present all the reasons we have just stated have been overturned: the dikes, the
sluices, the canals are in bad state.

The rule now is that the river rises during the great heats, when the sun traverses the signs of the
Crab, the Lion, the Ear (Virgo); at this period most of the rivers of the inhabited earth diminish;
this is what made it said that the rivers, at the period of their fall, brought their waters to the
Nile to make it grow. The flood of the Nile begins on the 5th of Boona, becomes apparent on the 12th,
accentuates on the 2nd of the month of Abib, and reaches its maximum on the 8th of Baba; from the
20th of this month, the river begins to descend again. The duration of the flood, from the beginning
to the day when it begins to decrease, is three months and twenty-five days, comprising the months of
Abib, Mesari, and Thot, and twenty days of the month of Baba. [Footnote: this passage is corrupted,
as the editor of the Arabic text remarked. He says: "What the author says, 'and the duration of its
flood...,' has no relation to what precedes; but if one holds to what he said above, one sees that the
duration of the flood of the Nile, from its beginning to the day when the river begins to decrease, is
four months and fifteen days." This duration comprises indeed twenty-five days of the month of Boona,
the ninety days of the months of Abib, Mesori, and Thot, and twenty days of the month of Baba; which
makes a total of one hundred thirty-five days -- that is, four months (of thirty days each) and
fifteen days.] The duration of its fullness, after having reached its maximum, is twelve days, after
which the river begins to descend again.

In our days still, on the 27th of Baba the level of the Nile is publicly cried; this level is obtained
by deducting from the height of the waters at this moment the height of the water that remained in the
nilometer on the 13th of Baba. The great Khalig is cut when the river reaches sixteen cubits. I have
heard people cry: "May God preserve us from a finger of the twentieth cubit!" Indeed, we have been
witness to it: when the Nile reaches the first finger of the twentieth cubit, the river spreads and
submerges the villages and the gardens, and the waters come back up out of the sewers. But, since the
events of the year 806 [21 July 1403 to 11 July 1404], were the Nile today to reach the first finger
of the twentieth cubit, the inundation would be insufficient, as a consequence of the bad state of the
dikes. Until after the year 500 of the hijra [2 September 1106 to 21 August 1107], the normal level of
the Nile was, at the nilometer of Gezireh, sixteen cubits -- that

[PDF p. 203]

is, eighteen cubits in reality; and one said then: "If the river rises one cubit more, the revenue of
Egypt will increase by a hundred thousand dinars, because the highest lands will be watered." If it
reached eighteen cubits, that was the maximum height; for eighteen cubits, at the nilometer of
Gezireh, represented twenty-two cubits of the Said. If the Nile exceeded the eighteenth cubit by one
cubit, the revenue of Egypt fell by a hundred thousand dinars, because the low lands were submerged.

Ibn Moyassar, in his Chronicles of the year 544 [22 May 1148 to 10 May 1149], says that that year the
flood of the Nile reached nineteen cubits and four fingers and that the water arrived as far as the
New Gate, at the end of the outer boulevard of Cairo; everyone took refuge in Cairo, coming from Masr
and from the side of the cemetery. When the caliph El-Hafiz li din Allah Abou-l-Mamoun learned that the
water had arrived at the New Gate, he became sad and shut himself in. One of his intimates penetrated
to him and questioned him on the cause of his grief: the caliph then showed him a book in which was
written this: "When the water arrives at the New Gate, the imam Abd el-Megid will die." "This book," he
said, "makes known to us our destiny and that of our reign, as well as what will happen after it." At
the end of this year, El-Hafiz fell ill and he died at the beginning of the year 544. [Footnote: 11 May
1149 to 29 April 1150.]

The cadi El-Fadel, in his Events of the year 576 [28 May 1180 to 16 May 1181], says: On Monday, the
26th of Rabi' I, corresponding to the 16th of Mesori, the Nile reached sixteen cubits, the normal
height of the flood, which had never before been observed at such a period. This is again a condition
of the Nile that is altered in our time. Formerly it reached its fullness at the beginning of Mesori,
and, in the year 812 [16 May 1409 to 5 May 1410], this fullness was reached on the 29th of Abib, a day
before the month of Mesori. It is a rare fact and worthy of being consigned to the annals of the floods
of the Nile. In 709 [11 June 1309 to 30 May 1310], the Nile was at its fullness on the 11th of Gemadi
I, or the 19th of Baba, forty-nine days after the Nourouz; in 592 [6 December 1195 to 23 November
1196], the canal of Abou-l-Menga was opened on the 19th of Chawwal -- it was El-Melek el-Aziz Othman who
proceeded with the ceremony -- and the Nile rose in the canal by one finger, the

[PDF p. 204]

eighteenth of the eighteenth cubit, a level named by the Egyptians the great sheet. Note that if what
the cadi El-Fadel calls the great sheet were reached some year in our time, it would be famine for the
country and death for the inhabitants; such a change is due only to the negligence brought to the
upkeep of the dikes. Today, when the river reaches sixteen cubits, the Egyptians are in jubilation,
for this level was formerly the normal level of irrigation and is so still today. It is then a day of
festival, and the sultan mounts his horse, then, followed by his escort, descends into a boat to
perfume the nilometer. The solicitude of the dynasty of the Fatimids for the cutting of the Khalig is
treated in the chapter dealing with the Halls of the Pearl.

According to some commentators, the day of the fullness (of the Nile) is precisely the one that was
fixed for Pharaoh by Moses as a rendezvous; it is said in the Koran (XX, 61): "The rendezvous will
take place on the day of the festival, when this people will be gathered in broad daylight." And until
the present the custom has been preserved of gathering to perfume the nilometer on that day.

The best policy followed regarding the public proclamation of the level of the Nile is that reported
by the fiqih Ibn Zoulaq in his History of Maezz li-din Allah: "That month (that is, in Chawwal 362)
[Footnote: the month of Chawwal 362 runs from 5 July to 2 August 973], El-Maezz li-din Allah forbade
proclaiming the flood of the Nile and writing about it to anyone but himself or the general Gauher. He
permitted this proclamation only when the Nile was at its fullness -- that is, when it had reached
sixteen cubits and the Khalig was cut. Note well the utility of this way of acting: if, at a given
moment, the Nile stops in its rise, or if this rise slows, everyone is anxious and apprehends the lack
of water; the grains are held back, their sale is opposed in the hope that prices will rise; the rich
hoard the cereals, whether they expect a rise in price or are anxious to make provisions for their
family. These circumstances bring on dearth and, if it happens that the Nile rises, the price of the
provisions no longer has stability, and if it does not rise, there is at once famine and drought. By
keeping the level of the Nile secret, the greatest and most useful service was rendered to Egypt.

El-Messih, in his History of Egypt, says: "The master of the palace prescribed to

[PDF p. 205]

Ibn Hiram to take a copy of the words the criers of the Nile pronounced as preliminaries of their
proclamation of the level. Here is what they said: 'Innumerable benefits are in the inexhaustible
treasures of God! God has made the blessed Nile rise so much.'" Ordinarily, at the beginning of the
flood, the waters of the Nile become green, and the Egyptians say then that the Nile has its cravings;
thus they think that to drink of it at that moment is harmful. Here is to what they attribute the
cause of this green coloration of the waters. The wild beasts, the elephants especially, come, pushed
by the extreme heat, to wallow in the marshes the upper Nile crosses. The waters of these marshes are
thereby altered, and when, at the period of the rainy season of those regions, the rains come to fall
in the south, the torrents pour into these marshes, whose corrupted waters escape and flow toward
Egypt. Shortly after the green water appears the new water that constitutes the flood of the Nile in
Egypt. This water is reddish, for it is charged with the silt the mass of the water carries with it.
At the maximum of the flood, the land of Egypt is covered by the waters; in the provinces, the
villages and the hills are surrounded by the liquid sheet, and one can reach them only by boat or by
following the crest of long dikes whose upkeep, to be sufficient, requires a quarter of the revenue (of
Egypt); they serve to maintain the waters until all the terrains have been suitably watered. When the
watering of a province is finished, the inhabitants of this province cut the dikes at places designated
by the engineer and the sheikhs; this cutting is done at a determined moment, neither after nor before,
as is attested by the regulations of each province. Each district is therefore watered by the water
that comes to it from the neighboring district and by the water it possesses of its own. If one
neglected to repair the dikes, redo the sluices, and dredge the canals, it would hardly be possible to
use the water of the Nile. This is what has happened in our time.

Formerly a third of the revenues was devoted to the repair of the dikes, so much care was taken of
them then. By acting thus, the irrigation of the whole country was regularized in a way useful for all.
Moreover, God willing, you will be able to see soon what the ancients and those who followed them
practiced on this subject.

Under the reign of the Fatimids, there were expenses assigned to the upkeep of the nilometer; the
costs, which amounted to fifty dinars per year, were paid to Ibn Abou-l-Raddad.

[PDF p. 206]

CHAPTER XVIII
OF THE BRIDGE ON WHICH THE NILE WAS CROSSED

There was on the Nile a bridge of boats thrown between Fostat and the island known today under the
name of Rodah. Another bridge joined this island to Ghizeh. These two bridges were composed,
together, of thirty boats.

[PDF p. 207]

CHAPTER XIX
OF WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ON THE SUBJECT OF THE WATER OF THE NILE, IN PRAISE OR IN BLAME

Master Abou Ali Ibn Sina (Avicenne) says: "The water of the Nile has been given singularly
exaggerated praise. Its qualities are fourfold: the remoteness of its source, the excellence of its
course, its depth, its direction from south to north. This last condition renders the water of the
Nile sweeter; as for the depth, there are other rivers that are just as deep as the Nile. The best
water is that which comes from springs -- not all springs indistinctly, but those that well up in a
warm terrain and whose nature is not dominated by foreign elements or substances, or in a stony
terrain which, all the more, is corrupted by none of the decompositions the earth can undergo; but
the springs that come out of a warm terrain are preferable to those that gush from a stony soil;
however, the springs born in warm lands are not all good, but only those which, besides this
condition, are running -- and not all running waters, but those that flow in the open air and whose
waters are exposed to the sun and the wind: this condition adds a great quality to running water. As
for stagnant water, its exposure in the open air sometimes gives it a quality it would not have had if
it had remained hidden and concealed.

The water that flows over a bed of earth is preferable to that which flows over a stony bed, for the
earth filters the water, removes the foreign matters that have mixed with it, and renders it limpid,
which the stone cannot do; but it is necessary that the earth forming the bed of the river be a warm
earth and not mud, niter, or other things of the same kind; otherwise, and if the water were deep and
of a rapid course, it would be altered by the quantity of matter that would mix

[PDF p. 208]

with it. The waters whose course is directed toward the sun -- that is, toward the east, and
especially toward the summer point (?) -- are the best, and all the more so as they are farther from
their point of origin; after these waters, the best are those that head toward the north. As for
those that flow toward the west or the south, they are detestable, and their bad quality increases
when the south wind blows. The waters that to the preceding conditions join that of descending from
high summits are better still; they are so sweet that one would believe them sugared, and one can mix
them with wine only in small quantity. They are of a light weight, cool easily and heat likewise,
thanks to their slight density; cold in winter, they are warm in summer, having neither dominant taste
nor odor. They descend the cataracts rapidly, easily dissolve what one puts in them to dissolve, and
easily cook what one puts in them to cook."

Master Ala el-Din Ali ben Abou-l-Harim ben Nafis, in his Commentary on the Canons (of Avicenne),
says: The qualities in question are not properly speaking qualities but simple conditions that
contribute to rendering the water better. One of these conditions, the remoteness of the source,
necessarily renders, as we have demonstrated, the water more subtle, because of the perdurance of its
movement. The Nile comes out, indeed, of a mountain situated beyond the equator, at [no.] 30' of the
measures of the greatest terrestrial circle divided into three hundred sixty degrees. This mountain
extends from 46 deg 30' to 61 deg 50' of longitude, counted from the extreme west, over a length of 15
deg 20', of the three hundred sixty degrees comprised in the greatest terrestrial circle. From this
mountain come out ten rivers produced by springs situated in the interior of the mountain. Each bundle
of five of these rivers empties into a great circular lake. The center of one of these lakes is
situated at 50 deg of longitude (from the extreme west) and 7 deg 31' of south latitude. The center of
the second lake is at the intersection of the 57th degree of longitude and the 7 deg 31' of south
latitude. They are equal (in surface), and the diameter of each of them is five degrees. From each of
these lakes come out four rivers that empty into a small circular lake situated in the first clime,
whose center is distant from the west by 53 deg 30' and from the equator by 2 deg, the lake being in
the first clime south of the equator. The diameter of this lake is two degrees. All these eight
rivers therefore flow into a single lake, from which comes out a single river, which is the Nile of
Egypt. The land of Nubia

[PDF p. 209]

is crossed by another river that comes out of a lake situated under the equator; this lake is great
and circular, and the length of its diameter is three degrees; the longitude of its central point is
43 deg. This river meets the Nile at 43' (sic) of longitude. After having passed the town of Masr,
the Nile, arrived at a village named Chatnouf, divides into two branches that go to empty into the
sea. One bears the name of the branch of Rosetta; it is from it that the canal of Alexandria
detaches. The second, known under the name of the branch of Damietta, detaches, on arriving at
Mansourah, a branch that takes the name of bahr Ashmoun, a branch that goes to empty into a lake
situated in those parts. The principal part, continuing its course, empties into the sea near
Damietta. The flood of the Nile comes from abundant rains that fall in Abyssinia. And God is the
most knowing!

The most scrupulous researches on the weight of water have demonstrated that very often, the lighter
it is, the better it is. This is the opinion that Ibn Sina emits in his chapter Of the Qualities of
Water. If you examine what he says of it, you will see that they are all found united in the water of
the Nile. First, the Nile comes from a spring and flows over a warm terrain; consequently, no element
of bad nature dominates in the soil that forms its bed -- a condition not presented by the springs
that flow over a soil impregnated with naphtha, alum, sulfur salts, etc.; on the contrary, the soil
over which the Nile flows produces gold, which the flakes one meets on its banks clearly prove;
certain people even occupy themselves with sorting the gold gathered on the shore and, by this means,
enrich themselves. Now one cannot deny the virtue attached to the presence of gold in the water.
Secondly, the Nile always flows uncovered, exposed to the sun and the wind. (3) The silt of the Nile
is a silt carried by the torrents the rains form and that cross warm lands; one can ascertain this by
breathing the agreeable odor that gives off from this silt when it is still humid. (4) The Nile is
very deep and its current so violent that it overturns, or nearly so, the columns that oppose its
course and carries with it the heaviest objects that obstruct it. (5) The distance separating the
source of the Nile from its mouth is considerable. Its extent, to which the extent of no other river
of the inhabited earth is comparable, was spoken of above. (6) It descends from elevated places; the
south is indeed higher than the north; and moreover it passes cataracts,

[PDF p. 210]

a high mountain from which the river precipitates itself toward the valley of Egypt. On this subject,
Ibn Qoteïba, in his work entitled Terms Little Used in the Traditions, reports the following account
of Garir ben Abd Allah el-Bagli. One day the Prophet questioned him on his stay at Valencia, and
Garir, among other things, told him that in this country the water did not flow from the heights.
"The best water," said the Prophet, "is sanam water -- that is, that which is found at the surface of
the earth." By sanam must be understood the water that is on the surface of the earth. Every thing
superposed on another thing is sanam in relation to the latter; this expression comes from the term
sanam el-ba'ir (the humps of camels), because of their elevation. Some commentators explain the verse
of the Koran (LXXXIII, 27) where it is said: "And it will be mixed with tasnim," in this manner: "It
will be mixed with what descends from on high." (7) The Nile heads from south to north and remains
consequently always opposed to the excellent north winds. (8) The water of the Nile is light, as has
been ascertained several times by comparing it to the waters of other rivers that it leaves far
behind it in this respect. (9) Its savor is sweet, its influence excellent on the digestion of foods
and their passage into the stomach, to such a point that the ingestion of this water brings on
eructation at once.

Such are the qualities that will make the water of the Nile judged excellent by all those who have
occupied themselves with physics and medicine and who are truly in a position to recognize how useful
and beneficent this water is.

Dhu-l-Qorneïn (Alexander), it is said, wrote a book in which he enumerated the marvels he had seen,
and this book embraced all the marvels of the world. As a conclusion he said: "All this has nothing
marvelous beside that marvel called the Nile of Egypt." If God, a philosopher said, had not subjected
the Nile to a law that makes it grow little by little in summer to bring to a good end the irrigation
of the soil, and makes it decrease at the time when the cultivations are going to begin, the land of
Egypt would be annihilated and uninhabitable. For the rains there are insufficient, and one meets
there no streams that can provide for the needs of all the lands, except in the province of the
Fayoum.

An ingenious poet said:

    Oh! what marvels this Nile presents!
        It is like an incomparable virgin.

[PDF p. 211]

    In the course of the year, it meets the earth and greets it,
        and if one has had enough of it, it takes leave and withdraws.
    When it appears, it is like the new moon; and when it is there,
        at its pleasure it increases and decreases.

Another expressed himself thus:

    The Nile seems to me endowed with heart and intelligence,
        from what human eyes see of it:
    it comes when one has need of it
        and withdraws when this need has ceased.

Tamim ben El-Mo'tamer said:

    The day we spend with the Nile is short,
        and ordinarily the days of joy are short.
    Beneath our feet the boats run swift as horses;
        they go up while the army of the waves goes down.
    Their waves are like the folds of the belly
        and their whirlpools like a navel.

The same said again:

    Do you not see the thunder weep and groan,
        and the swift lightning that laughs,
    drink from the cloud dark as night:
        when it weeps, the face of the earth smiles.
    See the water of the Nile when it increases:
        it is like sandalwood and mastic.

Another:

    God makes the Nile run when the east wind blows
        and shows us on its banks the soldiers of the marine,
    ranged on its two banks and brandishing their flexible lances,
        while the waves of the river wield Indian swords.
    If its water is bitter, it has the taste of roses;
        is it limpid, it has the color of rose-water that leaves after it a taste of bitterness.

Abou-l-Hassan Mohammed ben El-Ouazir says, on the subject of the gradation of the flood of the Nile
and its immense services:

    I always see great things come from small,
        and the full moon form from the crescent.
    Be not surprised, then, if the least channel of water,

[PDF p. 212]

    in Egypt, is esteemed as a source of wealth.
    An increase of one finger per day
        brings on a cubit of well-being.

El-Shahab Ahmed ben Fadl Allah el-Amari said:

    Egypt has a surprising quality:
        life there is marvelous and splendid.
    At the foot of a garden meet
        the vivifying water and the greenery.

Ibn Qalaqs said:

    Watch the sun set over the Nile
        and see what it leaves behind it of red twilight.
    It has disappeared, sending behind it its rays,
        as if it had burned itself in plunging beneath the waters,
    and the new moon soon comes to its aid
        like a canoe made of silver.

Bichr el-Moulk ben el-Mounagem said:

    How beautiful was the boat I rode in the air;
        from the height of the horizon I cast my eyes on the earth;
    it was evening, and one would have said a battle;
        if a coward had seen it he would have died of fear.
    The setting sun headed toward the West,
        pale over the Nile and fearing the attack of night;
    the moon leaned like the point of a lance
        thrown into the fury of combat, amid the blood of the twilight.

The cadi El-Fadel said: "The water of the Nile covers the plains and converts the fingers into
cubits; like a jealous man it covers the earth and, more jealous still, it spreads over it without
exceeding its limits (?). In Egypt it is the only cutter of roads (highwayman) one meets, and yet it
is the only one that is sought and feared."

The Nile of Egypt differs in its course from most rivers; it flows indeed from south to north, and
there are only two rivers that follow the same direction: the Mokran in the land of Sind, and the
Orontes -- today the Asi -- which passes by Hamat, a town of Syria.

Certain people have disparaged the water of the Nile. Abou Bekr ben Ouahshia, in his treatise on
Nabataean Agriculture, says: The waters of the Nile take their origin in a mountain situated beyond
the land of the Blacks and named the mountain of Qomr;

[PDF p. 213]

the sweetness of these waters and their flood demonstrate that they are exposed to the sun, and the
sun, if it does not burn them completely, procures for them at least a gentle and prolonged heating
which, without removing from them, by an exaggerated violence and ardor, their humid part so as to
leave them only their heavy parts, acts moderately on its waters and renders them so sweet that they
alter the constitution of those who drink of them in great quantity and determine eruptions, pimples,
and sores. The Egyptians, who drink much of it, have become sanguine and need to bleed themselves at
very close intervals; those who know physiology indeed subject themselves to a regimen apt to
extirpate from their body the pernicious germs that the water of the Nile introduces there; if it
were not so, they would fall into the infectious diseases we have just named and would be no more
than pimples and sores; this fact is due to the water of the Nile being less cold than the others,
and to the coction it has undergone rendering its viscosity greater than the viscosity of water
should be. Mixed with the foods in the intestine, it produces in great quantity bad and corrupted
excrements that determine the diseases recalled above. To evacuate the morbid germs they ingest with
the water of the Nile, the Egyptians constantly drink a syrup made of an acid and astringent fruit
juice and take remedies that rid them of the excrements. If the heat of the sun is stronger and
activates the coction of the water of the Nile, this water becomes salty like that of those marine
pools that have no other movement than that determined by the tide and the blowing of the winds; it
is then better for plants and cultivations than for animals.

Here is what Ibn Radouan says: The Nile crosses the territories of numerous peoples who inhabit the
Soudan, and arrives in the land of Egypt after having gathered in those regions all the filth and
corrupted matters found there. It crosses the land of Egypt, flowing from south to north, and goes to
empty into the sea of Roum. Its flood begins in summer and ends in autumn, and, during the period of
the high waters, there rises into the atmosphere an abundant humidity produced by an imperceptible
evaporation; consequently summer and autumn, dry by their nature, become humid. Moreover, when the
river begins to swell, the waters spread over the soil and deposit there all they contain of filth --
carcasses of animals, refuse, detritus of wood and plants, stagnant waters of the marshes

[PDF p. 214]

that they have carried with them -- all this mixes with the soil itself and with the silt, for the
earth here is very loose, not to mention the fish of the Nile and of the marshes that deposit their
eggs there. At the beginning of the flood one sees the Nile become completely green, owing to the
quantity of stagnant water that mixes with the waters of the river, and which is saturated with
corrupted matters, mosses, and water-lentils that render the water greenish. Then the river becomes
turbid and seems until the end of the flood to carry mud; if, as soon as it has become transparent
again, you take a little of this water in a vessel, you will see form in it an abundant deposit of
silt, while the liquid part will remain viscous and of a fetid and insupportable odor; it is one of
the most evident indications of the malignity of this water and of its corruption. Hippocrates and
Galen have demonstrated that the waters that corrupt most rapidly are the rainwaters subtilized by
the sun, and one of the characteristics of the water of the Nile is that it arrives in Egypt when it
is rendered to its maximum of subtlety, thanks to the violent heats of the Soudan. If to this
condition comes to be added the state of corruption of the land of Egypt, the decomposition of the
water aggravates still more; thus there are born in this river numerous species of fish; the
excrements of the animals, indeed, the residues of plants, the very corruption of the water and of
the fish eggs, determine the production of these fish, as Aristotle said in his Treatise of Animals;
this is quite evident moreover, for every matter that decomposes engenders, by its very decomposition,
animals, and it is for this that there are produced in abundance in Egypt worms, rats, serpents,
scorpions, wasps, flies, etc. This shows clearly that what predominates in Egypt is heat and
accidental humidity, that its temperature is subject to numerous variations, that its air and its
water are of bad quality. Sometimes, at the end of spring and the beginning of summer, the Nile is
dry on the side of Fostat; the water, corrupted by the quantity of things thrown into it, becomes
there of a repugnant stench. It is quite clear that the water, arrived at this degree of corruption,
sensibly alters the health of the people (who use it); thus it is necessary to draw the water at the
places where the current of the river is most rapid and where, consequently, the corruption is less.
Everyone purifies this water according to the temperature. In summer, when it is very hot, one uses
chalk, earth of Armenia, red earth, nabq, and pounded medlars, and vinegar.

[PDF p. 215]

During winter, when it is very cold, one employs the bitter almond, the interior of the apricot pit,
pennyroyal, and alum; and even so it is necessary to filter what has been purified before drinking
it. To purify the water of the Nile, put it in a vessel of potter's clay, terracotta, or leather and
use only what transudes through the porosities of the vessel. If you prefer, boil it and let it
purify in the night air; then filter the water thus purified and use it.

If the water seems contaminated by some harmful matter, boil it then let it cool in the open air, in
the coolness of the night, then purify it by means of the ingredients we have indicated. The best is
to use this water only after having purified it several times; here is how one proceeds: one first
heats and boils it, then lets it cool in the coolness of the night, then the water thus purified will
be filtered. One purifies it again by means of some ingredient, and puts the purified part in a
vessel; one will use only what oozes through the porosities of the vessel. The vessel intended to
receive this water will be, in summer, of potter's clay or terracotta worked in the month of Tobe;
one may equally use filters of stone or leather or any other matter that cools. In winter one will
make use of vessels of glass or porcelain. The vessels fabricated in summer, of potter's clay or
terracotta, will be placed during the summer in a cellar exposed to the north wind; they will be
exposed to the heat during winter. One cools the water in summer by mixing into it rose-water or by
depositing in it a clean cloth in which one will have wrapped a piece of chalk, or seeds of purslane
or white poppy, or earth of Armenia or red earth, but in such a way that the water cools without
mixing with the ingredient. The vessels are cleaned in summer with pounded potter's clay, barley
flour, purslane, or sandalwood, and during winter with alkali or galingale; they are perfumed with
mastic or aloes. The beginning of the flood and the moment when the rise of the waters stops are the
two periods when the water of the Nile is the worst. One must then boil it and exaggerate its
purification, employing the interior of the apricot pit and all that can make the viscosity
disappear. The best water of the Nile is that of the month of Tobe, when the cold is at its maximum;
the Egyptians know well, by experience, that the water of Tobe is the best; thus many of them store
it in vessels of glass and porcelain and make use of it [...]

[PDF p. 216]

throughout the year; they claim that it does not alter, and they do not even take the trouble to
purify it, persuaded as they are that it is altogether pure. But do not trust this, and purify it
all the same, for stored water certainly alters.

This is what I have found in the way of criticism of the water of the Nile. It emerges from it that
the water alters according to the terrain over which it flows, and not because it is bad in itself.
Be not frightened, then, by what you hear said; the matter is no otherwise than I have set it forth.
And as the malignity of the water is in proportion, not to the quantity, but to the alteration, you
know the means of eliminating the pernicious substances that have mixed with it. And God is the best
guide, by his goodness and his beneficence.

[PDF p. 217]

CHAPTER XX
OF THE MARVELS OF THE NILE

Among the marvels of the Nile there is the hippopotamus. Abd Allah ben Ahmed ben Selim el-Assouani,
in his History of Nubia, says: "The distance separating Dongola from the beginning of the land of
Aloua is greater than that separating Dongola from Assouan, and one meets there many more villages,
farms, islands, livestock, palms, trees, doums, cultivations, and vines than on the side touching
the land of Islam. In these regions are islands that take days to cross, and that are all peopled
with serpents, wild beasts, and carnivores; one finds there also deserts where thirst is dreaded. At
this point (Aloua) the Nile makes a bend and heads first toward the east, then toward the west for
days (of march), and finally reaches the Said, whose terrain is much more sloping. It is the region
where the bend of the Nile touches the mines known under the name of Shatka; the country itself
bears the name of Shanqir. It is from there that the qomri (turtledove) comes, and the hippopotamus
abounds in this place.

"Simoun, hereditary prince of Aloua, affirmed to me that he had counted in one island seventy of
these animals. They are beasts that live on the banks of the river, similar to horses and large as
buffaloes; their short legs end in hooves; they have the color of horses and are also furnished with
manes; their ears are as small as those of horses, and their throat is like that of that animal;
their tail is similar to that of buffaloes; they have a very wide muzzle, such that at first sight
one would take it for a sack; their cry resembles a neighing, and their teeth are such that the
crocodile cannot resist them. If they are irritated, they attack the boats and make them sink; they
feed on the grass of the shore; their skin is of a surprising solidity -- shields are made of it."

[PDF p. 218]

This animal resembles the terrestrial horse, only its mane and its tail are longer and its color is
more beautiful; its hoof is cleft like that of the ox, and its size is a little greater than that of
the ass. It eats the crocodile with much voracity and is visibly stronger than it. Sometimes it
comes out of the water and covers the mares, and from this coupling are born the most beautiful
horses in the world. A man, one day, went down to the bank of the Nile having with him a superb
mare. A black hippopotamus spotted with white came out of the river and covered the mare, who became
pregnant and gave birth to a colt of marvelous forms. The man, wishing to have another colt,
returned to the same place with the mare and the first colt. The hippopotamus appeared, sniffed the
colt for a moment, and returned quickly toward the river, where the colt followed it. The man came
back to this place, but he never again saw the hippopotamus or the colt.

In the Nile and in the land of Egypt, recounts El-Maçoudi, there are a great number of marvelous
animals; among others, the fish named torpedo (electric ray), which measures nearly a cubit. If it
falls into the net of a fisherman, the latter feels in the hand and the forearm a shock that
announces to him that a torpedo is caught; he then hastens to take it and make it come out of the
net. If the fisherman touches it with a piece of wood or a reed stalk, he feels the same commotion.
Galen speaks of this fish and says that if one places it alive on the head of a patient affected
with cephalalgia or violent migraine, he is relieved at once. Ibn el-Beithar says, on the authority
of Galen, that it is a marine animal that causes torpor, and, he adds, it is claimed that, put in
contact with the head of a person affected with migraine, it appeases the ill, and that applied to
the rectum of a patient whose anus comes out of its place, it puts the anus back in order. I made
this double experiment and obtained no result in either of these two cases; I thought that no doubt
the beast was already dead when I had brought it near the patient's head, believing that even dead
it must still be a remedy as efficacious against migraines as the other remedies, but I ascertained
that it had effect only as long as it was living. According to Dioscorides, it is a marine fish that
numbs; if one places it on the head of a person suffering for a long time from a violent headache,
it appeases the violence of the ill, and if one applies it to a hemorrhoid sufferer whose anus comes
out, the patient is cured. Younis asserts

[PDF p. 219]

that if one rubs oneself with oil in which this fish has cooked, one appeases the most violent
rheumatisms. Ibn Beithar says: I saw on the coast of Malaga, in Spain, a flat fish of the same color
as the torpedo of Egypt; its belly is white, and it has, to numb those who touch it, the same virtue
as the fish of Egypt -- this virtue is even greater in the fish of Spain; it is never eaten. It is
said that if a woman carries on her a fragment of this fish, her husband cannot stay away from her;
and reciprocally, if the husband carries a fragment of the fish, his wife cannot separate from him.

The soqonqor (skink) is the product of the fish and the crocodile; it is not a fish, since it has
two hands and two feet; it is not a crocodile either, for its tail is flat and smooth, wide and
without spines, while that of the crocodile is thick and bristling with spines. The fat of the
soqonqor incites to coitus, and one meets it nowhere else but in the Nile and in the river Mohran,
in India. I have been told that certain people, having roasted one of these animals and eaten it,
all died on the spot. The soqonqor, says Avicenne, is a lizard fished in the Nile, and which is, it
is said, engendered by the crocodile. The best are fished in spring. According to another
(physician), the soqonqor is a young crocodile; on coming out of the egg, if the young one heads
toward the water, it is a crocodile; if it heads toward the desert, it is a soqonqor. According to
Ibn Beithar, it would be a species of locust that one dries in autumn; to drink, mixed with any
beverage whatever, the value of two drachms of the part that touches the kidneys incites to coitus.
This animal much resembles the lizard and is met in the sands of the Said that border the Nile. It
is one of the animals that live on land and stay in the water -- that is, in the Nile; thus it is
called water-lizard because it resembles the lizard and stays in the water. The soqonqor is of both
sexes: the male is furnished with two testicles similar, in form and placement, to the testicles of
the cock, and the female lays more than twenty eggs that she buries in the sand; the male has two
penises and the female two vulvas. This animal, after having bitten a man, runs to the water; if it
finds some, it throws itself in; if it does not find any, it urinates and rolls in this urine; as
soon as that is done, the bitten man dies and the soqonqor remains safe. But if the bitten man gets
ahead of the soqonqor and enters the water before the latter

[PDF p. 220]

has rolled in its urine, the soqonqor dies on the instant and the bitten man escapes. The male is
the best and most efficacious for rendering coupling fecund; it is even the only one that enjoys
this virtue, the female not being endowed with it. One chooses, among all the parts of the (male)
soqonqor, the one closest to the origin of the tail in the axis of the navel. The season when it is
fished is spring, for it is the one when it is most excited to coitus and when its virtue is
greatest. As soon as it is caught, it must be slaughtered the same day; if it is left alive, its fat
melts, its flesh softens, and its virtue weakens; then one cuts the head and the extremity of the
tail without detaching them entirely, and one splits the belly lengthwise; one throws away all it
contains except the kidneys and the scrotum, and after having cleaned it well, one fills it with
salt, sews up the opening, and hangs it head down, in the shade, at a moderate temperature, and
leaves it thus until it is dried; then, if one is quite certain it is not corrupted, one puts it in
a vessel pierced with holes -- for example a basket made of willow or palm branches or some other
analogous object -- in which one leaves it until the moment one wishes to make use of it. Fresh, its
flesh is hot and humid; dried, it is hotter still but less humid. The use of the soqonqor does not
succeed for those who have a hot and dry temperament, but succeeds very well for those whose
temperament is cold and humid. The property of the flesh and fat of this animal is to push to
coitus, excite passion, give vigor in copulation, and calm the diseases of the cold nerves; one may
employ, either simple or in composition, the part that touches the navel and is in a straight line
with the tail; but use in the simple state is preferable. When this flesh is dry, one employs it in
the dose of one to three mithqals according to the age and temperament of the individual and
according to the country and the weather. One grinds it and mixes it with a beverage -- honeyed
water or juice of raisins -- or else one sprinkles it on soft-boiled egg yolks and swallows. One
also employs the flesh by taking one to two drachms that one simply beats with egg yolks or
something analogous, such as pounded rocket seeds. One finds the soqonqor only in the Fayoum; the
period when one fishes the most of it is Lent, when, the cold being very sharp, the animal comes out
of the water and comes onto the shore; it is at this moment that one catches it.

[PDF p. 221]

One reads in Maçoudi: If the horse of the Nile (hippopotamus), coming out of the river, stops at some
point of the countryside, the Egyptians know that the Nile will rise to that very place, without
reaching higher or stopping lower. It is for them an incontestable truth based on experience and
habit. When it leaves the river, this animal grazes the cultivations and causes great damage to the
proprietors of lands and harvests; it comes out of the water during the night and goes directly to a
certain point in the fields, then, retracing its steps, it eats what is on its path from the place
where it had stopped; on the way out it does not eat. After having eaten, it re-enters the water,
begins to drink, and then gives back in different places all it had absorbed. This being repeated
several times, the damage caused to the proprietors of the farms multiplies; lupins are then brought
to the animal, deposited in numerous heaps, thick and spaced apart, at the place from which it is
known it must come out; the animal eats them and returns to the water; as soon as it has drunk, the
lupins swell in its belly, which swells in turn and ends by bursting; the dead animal floats on the
water, which throws it onto the shore. At the place where it has been seen, one never meets
crocodiles. It has the form of the horse, but its hooves and its tail are different, and its forehead
is wider.

El-Messihi says: What is designated under the name of boulli is a species of fish whose first
specimen was seen in the Nile under the caliphate of El-Aziz billah Nazar ben el-Moezz lidin Allah;
before, it had never been seen in the Nile; under the same caliph appeared also a fish named labis;
it was given this name because it resembles the bouri found in the sea, whose body has the same
exterior appearance. It is quite probable that it is a sea fish that enters the sweet water.

Among the animals of the river, there is also the crocodile. It is, says Ibn Beithar, a well-known
animal met with in the great rivers and very abundant in the Nile. One finds it also in the river
Mohran, and sometimes in the Soudan. It is the lizard of the Nile. All animals, in eating, asserts
Ben Zahran, move the lower jaw; the crocodile alone moves the upper jaw and not the lower jaw. The
fat of the crocodile, mixed with butter and furnished with a wick, placed lit on the river or in a
wood, prevents the frogs of that river or that wood from croaking. If one goes around

[PDF p. 222]

a village with a crocodile skin and hangs it from the ceiling of a corridor, neither cold nor hail
will ever enter that village. If a crocodile bites a man and one spreads crocodile fat on the bite,
the man will be cured at once. If one coats with this fat the forehead of a fighting ram, all the
rams presented to it as adversaries will flee at its approach. The gall of the crocodile is used as
kohl for eyes that have too much white, and the white that is in excess disappears. Fumigations of
crocodile liver cure madness. The excrements of this animal are sovereign against the white films of
the eye, recent or old. If, when the animal is alive, one tears out its eye and hangs this eye above
a patient afflicted with leprosy, the ill stops and makes no more progress. If one hangs a part of
its right side above a man, this man becomes vigorous for coitus. The right eye of the crocodile
cures the diseases of the right eye, its left eye the diseases of the left eye. Its fat, melted and
mixed with oil of roses, is efficacious in the diseases of the vertebral column and the kidneys and
incites to coitus. Its blood, mixed with myrobalan and emblic, and employed in unctions against
nascent leprosy (leuce), restores its color to the skin; if one rubs the forehead with it, it cures
migraine. Its flesh rubbed with ceruse (?) fattens thin people. If one lets fall drop by drop into a
diseased ear melted crocodile fat, it is of excellent effect, and, if the treatment is continued,
one cures deafness; if one rubs with this fat a man afflicted with quartan fever, the ill is
appeased. The flesh of the crocodile is bad for the chyme.

El-Maçoudi says: The crocodile is brought to grief by a little reptile met with on the banks of the
Nile and in the islands; here is how: The crocodile has no anus, and all it eats becomes worm in its
stomach. When that bothers it, it goes onto the shore, stretches out on its back, and opens its
mouth. At once a bird whose habitual function this is approaches and eats the worms that come out of
the crocodile's belly. It is then that this little reptile of which we have spoken comes out of the
sand where it is hidden and, jumping into the mouth of the monster, penetrates to its belly and
strives to pierce it; the crocodile rolls on the ground, gains the bottom of the water, but the
reptile continues its work and ends by piercing the crocodile, which sometimes kills itself before
its enemy has come out; the latter escapes after the death of the animal. This enemy of the
crocodile measures about a cubit in length;

[PDF p. 223]

it has the form of a centipede (?) and is furnished with a great number of feet and legs.

Formerly, it is said, in the mountains of Fostat, was a talisman such that the crocodiles could not
approach the neighboring countries; arrived at the limit of the talisman's action, they turned over
on their backs and the children amused themselves with them; this lasted until they had passed the
limits of the city; then only did they resume their normal position and return to their natural
state. Subsequently this talisman was broken and lost its virtue. It is said that the crocodile lays
eggs similar to goose eggs, in which sometimes form little rats that grow and reach a length of ten
cubits, and which, in aging, become longer still. The crocodile makes sixty movements at once and in
the same place. Its left tooth is efficacious against fever.

[PDF p. 224]

CHAPTER XXI
A FEW WORDS ON THE MEANS OF FORESEEING THE STATE OF THE NILE EACH YEAR

Ibn Radouan, in his Commentaries on the four books (of Avicenne), says: The state of the Nile is
subordinate to certain conditions; first, it is necessary that prolonged rains fall in the south
before and during the flood: consequently, at the beginning of summer, when Venus and Mercury are in
conjunction, the Nile is very high, because of the coolness of the air, while at the beginning of
spring or summer, at the moment of the conjunction of Mars and another planet, it must be very low
because of the rarity of the southern rains. It is also necessary that the north winds stop the
course of the river; the south wind indeed accelerates its course and prevents it from remaining
stationary. If, then, one knows that the rains are abundant or rare in the south, and what wind blows
in Egypt during the summer season, one can foresee what the state of the Nile will be and,
consequently, the degree of abundance or dearth that this state presages for Egypt.

Abou Samer ibn Younis, the astronomer, says, on the authority of Ptolemy: To know the level the flood
of the Nile will reach, it suffices to observe Venus, Mercury, and the Moon at the moment when the Sun
is in the sign of the Crab. If the state of these planets is satisfactory, and nothing bad is visible
in them, one can affirm that the Nile will grow and reach the necessary height; but if the state of
these planets is weak, one can affirm the contrary; is one of these planets brilliant and the other
weak, the Nile will reach a medium height. In sum, the good state of the three planets announces a
perfect Nile; their doubtful state a medium Nile; the weakness of their scintillation, their position,
or their point of greatest distance from the earth presages the fall of the waters and announces that
the Nile will maintain itself very low. On the contrary, the scintillation of Venus in the sign of the
Lion makes the waters of the south descend. Let one examine, says Abou Ma'cher, the three planets
Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, at the moment when the Sun traverses [...]

[PDF p. 225]

the sign of the Crab; if their march is at its maximum of rapidity, the Nile will be very high; if
their march is medium, calculate the maximum and minimum of the march of these bodies and base
yourself on the result of this calculation; if their march is slow, the flood of the Nile will be
very weak. If the three planets have different marches -- some moving very rapidly, others very
slowly -- base yourself on the fastest (and the slowest), take the mean, and establish your forecast
according to it.

The Copts say that one must see to what day of the Arabic month the 1st of the month of Barmoudah
corresponds, add to the figure of that day the number 85, and take the sixth of the sum; the result
will give the number of cubits the flood of the Nile will reach that year. Among other experiments
relating to the Nile, there is also this one: On the day when the Jacobite Christians of Egypt break
the fast, see how many days remain to run to finish the Arabic month, add 34 to the number thus
obtained, and divide the sum by 12. If after this division a number remains, it will indicate by how
many cubits that year the Nile will exceed twelve cubits; but if the number divides by 12 without
remainder, the year will be bad. Here is what the Copts say further: If the 10th of the Arabic month
corresponds to the (1st of) Abib and the Moon is in the sign of the Scorpion, in conjunction with the
heart of the Scorpion, the Nile will be low; otherwise, the Nile will be good. Another experiment:
If, on the first day of Boona, the north wind blows in the morning, the Nile will be high; if it
blows at noon, the Nile will be medium; if it blows in the evening, the Nile will be low; if this
wind does not blow at all, the Nile will not rise that year. One may, it is said, make the same
observation on the first Thursday of Boona.

Here is an experiment that I have myself verified during several years, and that the sheikh who had
indicated it to me had also verified, as did the one who had transmitted it to him, and which is
consequently exact: observe on the 1st of Mesori the height of the Nile, add to it eight cubits; the
sum will represent the number of cubits the flood of the Nile will reach that year. Another
experiment, current in Egypt and which I have myself verified and recognized exact, is the following:
on the eve of Saint Michael's, at noon, take a little silt over which the Nile will have passed; this
fragment of earth must weigh exactly sixteen drachms; put it in a closed vessel until the morning of
the festival of Saint

[PDF p. 226]

Michael, then weigh it, and by as many kharrubas as it weighs more than the weight of the eve, by so
many cubits will the Nile rise that year, each kharruba representing one cubit. Another means: Take a
little wheat flour, knead it with water of the Nile in a vessel made of the silt of the river, and
leave this vessel closed during all the night preceding the festival of Saint Michael. On the morning
of the festival, if the dough has risen of itself, the Nile will be altogether complete; if, on the
contrary, the dough has not risen, it is a sign that the Nile will be very low.

One may also examine what wind blows on the morning of the festival; if it is a moderate wind, the
Nile will be high; if not, the Nile will be low, especially if the wind that blows is the merisi
(south wind). The Nile then will be insufficient. For the Copts, it is necessary to make the three
tests simultaneously; if they do not agree, the prognosis may not be exact.

Abou-l-Rihan Mohammed ben Ahmed el-Birouni, in his book entitled Traces That Subsist of the Past
Centuries, says: When the flood of the Nile approaches, the prudent people take a plank and sow on it
seeds of all sorts of plants and vegetables, and the whole is left thus until the night of the 25th of
the month of Tammouz, one of the Greek months, the night that is the last of the period of the great
heats; then the plank is exposed directly to the rising and setting of the planets, without any object
interposed between the plank and the sky. All that is not to be a good harvest that year has become
yellow by morning on the plank, while what is to come up well remains green. This is what the Copts
did. I have myself experimented, after having been instructed in it by a writer, that if rain falls,
however little, in the month of Baba, one must observe on what day of the Coptic month this fact
occurs, to know how many drachms the wheat will reach that year; the number of drachms will be equal to
the number of days already elapsed of the month of Baba. And the first time I made this experiment, the
rain fell on Thursday, the 15th of Baba, and the oueïba of wheat was sold that year at fifteen drachms.

[PDF p. 227]

CHAPTER XXII
OF THE FESTIVAL OF THE MARTYRS

Among other things that were formerly done in Egypt, there was the celebration of the Festival of the
Martyrs, one of the greatest rejoicings of the Egyptians; this festival fell on the 8th of the Coptic
month of Bachons. The Copts believe that never, in any year, does the Nile rise if one does not throw
into it the finger of one of their dead ancestors, enclosed in a casket. This day is a day of festival
when the Christians gather from all the villages; one mounts on horseback and plays; most of the
inhabitants of Cairo and of Masr gather by castes and go to pitch tents on the banks of the Nile and in
the islands of the river. Singers (male and female), proprietors of games or places of amusement,
prostitutes, debauchees, chasers of girls, brawlers, and people of pleasure -- all without exception go
to this festival. God alone knows the number of people who gather there; incalculable sums are spent
there, and all the vices and corruptions are displayed there without shame; at these festivals occur
riots in which there is often loss of life. There is sold there, in wine alone, more than a hundred
thousand dirhems of silver, which makes five thousand dinars of gold; in a single day, a Christian sold
more than twelve thousand dirhems of silver of wine.

For this great festival, one always gathered at Choubra, in the suburb of Cairo, and the peasants of
Choubra counted only on what they sold of wine at the Festival of the Martyrs to pay their taxes. This
lasted thus until the year 702 [28 August 1302 to 14 August 1303]; at this period the sultan of Egypt
was El-Melek el-Naser Mohammed ben Qalaoun, and the direction of public affairs was entrusted to the
emir Rokn ed-din Bibars El-Gashenkir, who then had the charge of intendant of the sultan, the lieutenant
of the sultanate of Egypt being the emir Seif ed-Din Salar. The emir Bibars energetically opposed the
celebration of the festival; the affairs of Egypt were then in his hands and in those of the emir Salar;
the two held El-Naser in tutelage, and the latter could not eat according to his tastes except with
their permission. The emir Bibars therefore gave the order not to throw a finger into the Nile and not to
celebrate the festival that took place on this occasion. He gave instructions to the chamberlains and
the valis of Cairo to prevent the people from gathering at Choubra, as they were accustomed. Messengers
set out into all the provinces of Egypt, carrying letters enjoining the valis to proclaim publicly
Bibars's instructions in the provinces; according to these instructions, no Christian was to leave (his
village) to attend the Festival of the Martyrs. This measure displeased all the Copts of Egypt -- as much
those who professed Islam and declared themselves Muslims as those who had remained Christian -- and all
concerted among themselves. One of these Copts, named El-Tag ben Saïd el-Doulat, occupied the functions
of writer and was then in the service of the emir Bibars; he had taken possession of his mind and
occupied himself with all his affairs, according to the usage of the sultans of Egypt and their Turkish
emirs, who abandoned their affairs to the care of their Coptic secretaries -- as much to those who hid
their infidelity as to those who let it appear.

[PDF p. 228]

The Copts therefore did not cease to circumvent El-Tag until he had, on the subject of the festival, a
conversation with his master the emir Bibars; in this conversation, El-Tag insinuated to the emir that
the yield of the taxes would be diminished if the festival were forbidden, and that most of the taxes of
Choubra were paid only thanks to it, then he said to him: "If this festival is not celebrated, the Nile
will not rise, and the lack of inundation will destroy the countryside of Egypt," and many other
persuasive words and artful discourses. But God strengthened the heart of Bibars and gave him the
necessary force to resist all the fine words that could be said to him; he persisted in forbidding the
celebration of the festival and said to El-Tag: "If the Nile is to rise only if this finger is thrown
into it, let it not rise! but if it is God who directs it, we will inflict a refutation on the
Christians." And the festival was forbidden that year; the prohibition lasted until the year 738 [30
July 1337 to 20 July 1338]. At this period, El-Melek El-Naser Mohammed ben Qalaoun had the dike repaired
that was intended to keep the waters of the river away from Fostat and throw them back on Ghizeh, as will
be seen in a special chapter of this book. The emir Yelbagha El-Yahgahoui and the emir El-Tanbagha
El-Maradini asked the sultan

[PDF p. 229]

permission to go hunting and to absent themselves for some time. But the sultan, who felt for them a
violent affection and an extraordinary passion, could not resolve to let them leave and, to divert them
from their expedition, said to them: "We will reestablish the Festival of the Martyrs, and you will find
there amusements far more agreeable than your hunting party." The time of the festival approached; the
two emirs having consented, the sultan had published in the provinces the reestablishment of the
Festival of the Martyrs; the day of the festival having come, the two emirs mounted in great boats and
not in light canoes, and everyone came from all sides; there appeared also the singers, the proprietors
of games, the prostitutes; all mounted on the Nile and, according to their custom, displayed in broad
daylight their habitual turpitudes and all sorts of vilenesses. The emirs made, in victuals, pastries,
etc., unheard-of expenses of an extraordinary exaggeration, lavishing on all incalculable largesses.
This lasted thus three days.

The time of interruption of the festival, from its prohibition by the emir Bibars to its reestablishment
by El-Melek El-Naser, was thirty-six years. It was then celebrated each year until the year 755 [26
January 1354 to 15 January 1355], the year when a movement of Muslims against the Christians occurred and
when the inventory was drawn up of the mortmain property belonging to the Christian churches and the
convents. The secretary of the emirs was constrained to draw up this list and carry it to the divan of
the wakfs. It comprised twenty-five thousand feddans all belonging to the convents and the churches. This
list was handed to the emirs of the kingdom, regents of the State in the time of El-Melek El-Saleh Saleh
ben Mohammed ben Qalaoun, who were the emir Scheikhou El-Amri, the emir Sarghetmesch, and the emir Taz.
Immediately it was decided to make a gift (of these lands) to the emirs, in addition to their fiefs, and
there was left to the Christians only what they merit -- contempt. A great number of churches were
destroyed: the account of this destruction will be found in the chapter that concerns it in this book,
the chapter of the Churches.

In the last decade of the month of Ragheb of the aforesaid year (755), the chamberlain and the emir Ala
ed-din Ali ben El-Kourani, vali of Cairo, went toward Choubra el-Khiam, in the suburb of Cairo, destroyed
the church of the Christians there, and having removed the finger enclosed in its box, carried it to
El-Melek [...]

[PDF p. 230]

El-Saleh, who had it burned before him in a public place and had the ashes thrown into the Nile, so
that the Christians could not gather them; and from then until the present the Festival of the Martyrs
has no longer been celebrated. To God be glory and munificence!

[PDF p. 231]

CHAPTER XXIII
OF THE CANALS DERIVED FROM THE NILE

When the Nile has reached the normal height of its flood, the canals and the channels are opened that
carry the water to the right and the left as far as the countries most distant from the bed of the
river. The greater part of the canals, channels, dikes, and low-lying terrains is in the region of the
north; there are very few in the region of the south -- that is, in the Said; in this part of Egypt the
traces and debris of these works are effaced and have disappeared. The most known of all these canals is
the canal of El-Mengah; the others are the canal of Memphis, that of El-Menha, those of Ashmoun Tanah,
of Sardous, of Alexandria, of Damietta, of Cairo, the Bahr Abou-l-Menagga, and the canal of Naser
outside Cairo.

Ibn Abd el-Hakem reports, on the authority of Abou Rahm El-Samaï, that Egypt was formerly furnished with
sluices and dikes skillfully arranged and managed, by means of which the Egyptians brought the water to
the foot of their houses and their courtyards, imprisoning it at their will and directing it according
to their caprice. This is what God speaks of when he recalls these words of Pharaoh: "Does not the
kingdom of Egypt belong to me? And do not these rivers flow under my domination? Do you not know it?"
(Koran, XLIII, 50.) There was not then on the earth a kingdom more beautiful than the kingdom of Egypt.
On the two banks of the Nile, from the beginning to the end, extended gardens that covered on each bank
the space between Assouan and Rosetta.

What are called the seven canals are formed by the ensemble of the canals of Alexandria, of Sakha, of
Damietta, of Memphis, of the Fayoum, of El-Menha, of Sardous; all along these canals are gardens that
touch one another without any interval; the cultivations cover all that extends from one mountain to
the other and that is reached by the water, from one end of Egypt to the other. All Egypt is watered by
a flood of sixteen cubits, thanks to the management of the canals, the sluices, and the dikes. And this
is what the Koran alludes to:

[PDF p. 232]

"How many gardens, springs, fields, and places of delight they have left!" (XLIV, 25-26.) The places of
delight are, it is said, the pulpits, for there were a thousand pulpits in Egypt.

CANAL OF SAKHA. -- The canal of Sakha was dug by Nadares ben Sa ben Qobtim ben Misraïm ben Beïsar ben Ham
ben Noah; he was one of the kings of the ancient Egyptians who reigned in the first ages. Ibn Ouasif
Shah says: Nadares was the first king to govern all the provinces: he reigned after his father Sa, and,
under him, the land of Egypt was tranquil. Nadares was wise and experienced, and moreover energetic,
powerful, and skilled in affairs. He practiced justice, established the temples and their priests in the
best possible state, and extended his empire over all the provinces. It was he, it is said, who dug the
canal of Sakha, and, under his reign, the revenue of the country rose to a hundred fifty million dinars.
An Amalekite of Syria dared to attack him and marched against him, believing all permitted to him in his
regard; Nadares entered Palestine, killed many people there, and reduced to captivity some sages whom he
established in Egypt. The kings dreaded him. Toward the thirtieth year of his reign, the blacks of the
lands of Zing and Nubia made an irruption into his kingdom and gave themselves over to pillage there.
Nadares gathered the army of the provinces of Egypt and prepared ships; he sent a general named
Philotheos with three hundred thousand men and another general with an equal army, and on the Nile he
dispatched three hundred boats each mounted by a magician who knew how to accomplish marvelous things.
Then he himself set out with a considerable army, met the army of the Blacks, more than a million men
strong, beat them, killed a great number in admirable combats, and made a considerable quantity
prisoners; his army pursued the Blacks to the land of the Elephants, in the country of Zing. He took a
great number of these animals as well as tigers and other wild beasts and sent them to Egypt, where he
tamed them. He had erected on the frontier of his country a monument on which he had inscribed the
account of his expedition and his victory, and the date of his campaign. He then died in Egypt and was
buried in a naos to which were transported a quantity of images of the planets, gold, gems, jewels, and
statues; on the naos was engraved his name and the date of his death. Talismans were put on it to keep
away (the destroyers), and he left the kingdom to his son Maliq ben Nadares.

[PDF p. 233]

CANAL OF SARDOUS. -- It was dug by Haman, or, according to others, by Talma ben Qoumes. This king,
having mounted the throne, seized all that was in the treasures of the Egyptians. It is he who,
according to the Copts, would be the Pharaoh of Moses; this Pharaoh, according to the historians, would
be El-Oualid ben Mosa'b, who was an Amalekite (Shepherd). The Pharaohs, according to them, would number
seven. Talma, according to what is recounted, was small, had a long beard and blue eyes; his left eye was
smaller than the other; he had a mole on his forehead and he was lame. He was, it is said, Egyptian, and
the Egyptians know his genealogy. Others say that he had come to Memphis with an ass laden with natron
that he wished to sell; that day, the Egyptians, not knowing whom to name king, had decided to give the
power to the first man who would come. And having seen Talma arrive, they chose him for king. The latter,
after his installation on the throne, squandered the money, surrounded himself with devoted people, and
made perish those who did not obey him. Then, having put order to his affairs, he designated for his
successor Haman, one of his relatives; the latter drew from the treasury and employed it to build towns
and monuments and to dig a great number of canals. It is he, it is said, who dug the canal of Sardous.
Each time he directed it toward one of the villages of the Houf, the inhabitants of that village brought
him money, so much so that he gathered considerable sums that were subsequently restored to their
proprietors. Ibn Abd el-Hakam recounts, on the authority of Abd Allah ben Amr ben El-As, that the Pharaoh
employed Haman to direct the works of the canal of Sardous. When the latter began the works, the people
of all the villages came to beg him to make the canal pass near their village and gave him money. And
Haman, it is said, directed his canal toward the agreed village, to the east, then brought it back toward
another village to the south, then made it return toward the west, then toward another village of the
south. And the sums he received from the people of all these villages amounted to a hundred thousand
dinars that he carried to the Pharaoh. The latter asked what this money meant, and Haman recounted to him
how he had dug his canal. "Woe to you!" said Pharaoh to him; "the master must be gentle to his subjects
and show himself generous toward them, and not take from them what they possess. Give back to the people
of each village what you took from them." Haman gave back the money to those who had handed it to him.
One knows in Egypt no canal more tortuous than the canal of Sardous; this is due

[PDF p. 234]

to the way in which Haman dug his canal. Haman was Nabataean.

CANAL OF ALEXANDRIA. -- Ibn Abd el-Hakam says: The tower of Alexandria was built by queen Cleopatra, who
prolonged the canal of Alexandria and brought it into the interior of the town. Before, it did not enter
it and stopped at a village named Kosa, opposite Karioun; the queen brought it into the town and paved
its bottom. According to El-Kandi, it was El-Harets ben Meskin, emir of Egypt, who dug the canal of
Alexandria. El-Assad ben Mammati, in his book entitled Rules of the Ministries, says: The canal of
Alexandria gives birth to a great number of secondary canals. Its length from its intake is thirty
thousand six hundred qassabahs. Its width varies from two and a half to three and a half qassabahs; the
quantity of water that stations varies with the state of the Nile. If the Nile is low, the water stays
very little in this canal; if it is high, it stays there more than two months. I have heard said by a
great number of chroniclers and scholars that if an inclined plane had been established between
Miniet-Natig and Natig, the water would maintain itself in this canal during winter and summer. I have
visited the whole Behera, the Houf, Damsis, and all the villages of this distant region; sugarcane,
colocasia, indigo, and the various summer cultivations were cultivated there absolutely as on the banks
of the Bahr El-Sharq, which is the canal of Mehallah. The towns multiplied and prospered on these banks.
The establishment of this inclined plane would be easy, for one finds stone at Rabouah and brick in the
Behera. The people of whom I have spoken had drawn up an estimate of the expense this work would require;
it amounted to about ten thousand dinars. Formerly, it is said, the water circulated all year in this
canal, and the fish were so abundant there that the children took them in cloths. One of the valis of the
province monopolized it for himself and forbade fishing there, but the fish has disappeared, and one no
longer meets there any but what is taken from time to time in nets.

CANAL OF THE FAYOUM AND OF EL-MENHA. -- It is one of the canals that the prophet of God Joseph the
veracious dug, when he put the Fayoum under cultivation, as will be seen in the chapter of this book that
treats of the Fayoum. It is derived from the Nile and its course is never interrupted. Near the Nile, in
the vicinity of Derout-Siriam -- a town that is called today Derout-El-Sherif, according to Ibn Yaghlan,
who was governor in the time of Zaher Beibars -- there detaches from the river a branch named El-Menha
that forms a canal heading toward the Fayoum.

[PDF p. 235]

This canal bears today the name of Bahr Youssef; its course is never interrupted at any moment of the
year, and it constantly waters the Fayoum; the surplus of its waters flows into a lake situated in this
region. A marvelous thing! at its beginning, the bed of this canal is without water; a little farther,
it becomes humid like a field wet with dew, then the course of the water establishes itself and becomes
such that one can no longer cross it except by boat; there forms thus a principal artery from which
depart several ramifications that spread everywhere in the Fayoum, watering the villages, the fields,
the gardens, and all the inhabited parts, and God knows it!

CANAL OF CAIRO. -- This canal is situated outside Cairo, on the west side, between this town and the
Meqs. At the beginning of Islam, it was named the Canal of the Commander of the Faithful, and today it
is generally known under the name of Canal of Haliem or Canal of the Pearl. It is an old canal that was
begun by Toutis, son of Malia, one of the kings of Egypt who resided in the town of Memphis. It was in
his time that Ibrahim (Abraham), the beloved of God, came to Egypt, and it was this Toutis who carried
off Sarah, wife of the patriarch, to whom he gave as servant Hagar, the mother of Ismaïl; and when
Ibrahim had sent Hagar and his son Ismaïl back to Mecca, the latter sent a message to Toutis to inform
him of her abandonment in a sterile place and to implore his help. Toutis then had this canal dug, thanks
to which he was able to send as far as Djedda wheat and other things to Hagar; he thus gave life to the
land of the Hedjaz. Subsequently, Andromanos, surnamed Élia, one of the Greek kings who reigned after
Alexander, son of Philip the Macedonian, took up again the work of this canal, and the boats circulated
on it; this took place four hundred and some years before the hijra of the Prophet. Later, Amr ben
El-As, having conquered Egypt, put the canal back into condition; after six months of work, the boats
were able to float on it and carry provisions into the Hedjaz: it is then that it took the name of Canal
of the Commander of the Faithful -- that is, of Omar ben El-Khattab, who had advised the enterprise.
From then on, the boats did not cease to circulate on it, from Fostat-Masr to Qolzoum, a town situated
on the eastern sea at the place named today Suez, and the water of the Nile did not cease to empty into
the sea near Qolzoum until the year 150 [6 February 767 to 25 January 768], the period when the caliph
Abou Giafar El-Mansour had this canal filled in, and

[PDF p. 236]

there has remained of it only what one still sees today. God willing, you will see what I say of it in a
more detailed way in the chapter of this book entitled Of the Exterior of Cairo.

BAHR ABOU-L-MENAGGA. -- This name of Abou-l-Menagga is given to this canal by the common people; it was
dug by El-Afdal, son of the Emir el-Giouch, in the year 506 [28 June 1112 to 17 June 1113]. The director
of the works was the Jew Abou-l-Menagga Shaïa; it is he who gave it his name. I have spoken of this canal
in the chapter of this book that treats of the belvederes and the promenades of the caliphs.

CANAL OF EL-NASER. -- This canal is outside the Meqs and was dug by El-Naser Mohammed ben Qalaoun, in
the year 725 [18 December 1324 to 7 December 1325]; it is spoken of in the chapter of this book that
relates to it.

[PDF p. 237]

CHAPTER XXIV
OF THE STATE OF EGYPT IN THE FIRST TIMES

El-Maçoudi says: The land of Egypt, according to what those who have occupied themselves with the
history of the world claim, was covered by the water of the Nile, which extended over all the country,
from the Said to the point of the Delta, at the place where Fostat is today. This sheet of water began
at the point named today the Cataracts, between Assouan and Nubia. It was thus until there had formed
obstacles that opposed the displacement and the current of the water, as well as what it carried from
Nubia, and which stopped thus from place to place. The water, consequently, withdrew from some points of
Egypt, and the country could be inhabited by men; the water continuing to withdraw little by little from
the lands, Egypt ended by covering itself with towns and constructions; a bed was traced for the river,
canals were dug, and the Nile was imprisoned in dikes. In the long run, the inhabitants of Egypt forgot
the first state of their country, the accumulation of years having made them lose the memory of the
condition of the first inhabitants. Such is my opinion; and Aristotle, in his treatise of Metaphysics,
says, among other things, that the land of Egypt was covered primitively by the Nile, which extended
like a sea. The water withdrawing ceaselessly, left little by little uncovered the elevated places; the
country began to be peopled and finally filled with towns, villages, and men. Before inhabiting the town
of Memphis, the men, it is said, lived at the foot of the Moqattam in numerous grottoes they had dug.
These grottoes are still seen in the mountain facing Memphis, south of the Moqattam, in that part of the
mountain that skirts the Deir El-Qoseïr, known today under the name of Deir el-Baghl, and which gives
onto the side of Tourah. If one stands near the pyramids of Nahia, one perceives these grottoes to the
east on the other side of the Nile. If, setting out from Tourah, one climbs the mountain, one meets
these grottoes and can penetrate them easily. They are vast caverns into which open other

[PDF p. 238]

underground passages that lead to Qolzoum; a single one of these grottoes can contain the inhabitants of
a whole town. If one penetrates them without taking the necessary precautions to guide oneself on the
return, one loses one's way there and dies. Egypt was, it is said, sterile and produced not the least
plant when Mathuselah ben Akhnoukh ben Yared ben Mahalaël ben Photian ben Enos ben Seth ben Adam gave it
in fief to a tribe of his children. When the latter arrived there, they found all the space comprised
between the two mountains covered by the waters of the Nile. Then, the water having withdrawn, they
cultivated the land thus uncovered, and the land showed itself full of blessings. Some time after, the
first 'Enqam ben Ariab ben Adam seized it by violence and peopled it with a multitude of men; he fought
the Beni Yared at the head of seventy thousand combatants, dug, from the river to the mountain, a canal
forty qassabahs wide, to prevent the enemies from reaching him. The Beni Yared came, but not finding a
path to arrive at 'Enqam, they addressed prayers to God, who made a fire descend on the land of Egypt.

[PDF p. 239]

CHAPTER XXV
OF THE PROVINCES OF EGYPT AND OF ITS NOMES

Formerly Egypt was divided into 153 nomes, each of which comprised one town and 365 villages. After the
repeopling of Egypt, in the time of Bokht-Nasr (Nebuchadnezzar), it was divided into 85 circles; then
this figure diminished progressively until Islam; at the moment of the conquest, it counted only 40
nomes, which comprised all the villages without exception. Finally, the whole of the country was divided
into two great parts: the Qibli, which comprises all that is south of the town of Masr, and the Bahari,
which comprises all that is north of this same town.

All Egypt, south and north, was divided into 26 provinces, which are: the Sharqieh, the Martahieh, the
Dakahlieh, the Aïouanieh, and the port of Damietta -- all this in the region of the north -- (as well
as) the island of Qouisna, the Gharbieh, the Samanoudieh, the Dangaouïeh, the Menoufieh, the Sitraouïeh
and Fouah, the two Mouzahmiehs, the island of the Beni Naser, the Beherat, Alexandria and its territory,
and the Houf-Damsis; in the region of the south, Ghizeh, the Atfihieh, the Bousirieh, the Fayoumieh, the
Behnesaouïeh, Ashmounein, the Manfaloutieh, the Assioutieh, the Akhmimieh, the Qousieh.

One also divides it into 30 circles, which are: the Fayoum, comprising 156 villages, or, according to
others, 360; Memphis and Ousim, with 55 villages; the Sharqieh, also named Atfihieh, with 17 villages;
the villages dependent on Ahnas, and among them Qimn, together 8 villages; the circles of Dallas and
Bousir, 6 villages; the circle of Ahnas, 95 villages, without counting the hamlets; the circle of
Behnesa, 120 villages; the circle of Feshn, 37 villages; the circle of Taba, 37 villages; the district
of Senoudat, 8 villages; the circle of Achmounein, 133 villages; the circle of lower Antinoe, 11
villages; the circle of Siout, 37 villages; the circle of Shotb, 8 villages; the circle of upper
Antinoe, 12 villages; the circle of Qahqouat, 37 villages; the circle of Akhmim and El-Doueïr, 63
villages; the [...]

[PDF p. 240]

circle of Sebabat and of the Oases, 63 villages, without counting the hamlets; the circle of Hou, 20
villages; the circle of Faou, 8 villages; the circle of Qena, 7 villages; the circle of Denderah, 10
villages; the circle of Qoft, 22 villages; the circle of El-Aqsar (Luxor), 5 villages; the circle of
Esna, 5 villages; the circle of Erment, 7 villages; the circle of Assouan, 7 villages; the ensemble of
the villages of the Said forms a total of 1,043, in which are not comprised the landing-stages and the
hamlets, which depend on thirty of these villages.

Circles of the Delta: the eastern Houf, 65 villages; the circle of Athribis, 108 villages, without
counting the ports and the hamlets; the circle of Benou, 87 villages, without counting the ports and
the hamlets; the circle of Nama, 150 villages, without counting the ports and the hamlets; the circle
of Basta, 39 villages; the circle of Tarabiah, 28 villages, among which El-Sadir, El-Hama, and Faqous;
the circle of Horbeit, 18 villages, without counting the ports and the hamlets; the circle of Sa and of
Ablil, 46 villages, among which Senhour, Farama, and El-Arich; in all, in the eastern Houf, 529
villages, without counting the ports, distributed in seven circles.

Belly of the countryside [Footnote: designation of the central part of the Delta comprised between the
mouth of Rosetta and that of Tanis]: the two circles of Damsis and of Menouf, 104 villages, without
counting the ports and the hamlets; the circle of Tatourat Menouf, 92 villages, without counting the
ports and the hamlets; the circle of Sakha, 115 villages; the circle of Beïdat and of El-Afrahoun, 23
villages, without counting the ports and the hamlets; the circle of Bachroud, 24 villages; the circle
of Nafar, 12 villages without counting the ports; the circle of Beba and of Bousir, 88 villages,
without counting the ports and the hamlets; the circle of Samanoud, 128 villages, without counting the
ports and the hamlets; the circle of Nousa, 21 villages, without counting the ports; the circle of
El-Osiah, 40 villages, without counting the ports; the circle of Negoum, 40 villages, without counting
the ports; Tennis and Damietta, 13 villages, without counting the ports, which abound; Alexandria.

Western Houf: circle of Sa, 73 villages, without counting the ports and the hamlets; circle of Shabas,
22 villages, without counting the ports and the hamlets; circle of Yadkoun, 43 villages without
counting the ports and the hamlets; district of Yadkoun, 29 villages, without counting the ports and
the hamlets; the Sherak,

[PDF p. 241]

9 villages; the circle of Ternout, 8 villages; the circle of Kharbata, 62 villages, without counting the
ports and the hamlets; the circle of Qortesa, 22 villages, without counting the ports and the hamlets;
the two circles of Masil and of El-Malidis, 49 villages, without counting the ports; the two circles of
Ahnour and of Rosetta, 17 villages; the Behera, the district of Alexandria, with its plantations of
vines and palms, Mariout, the town of Alexandria, Libya, the Maraqieh, 124 villages, without counting
the ports; that is, for the western Houf, 449 villages without counting the ports, the whole distributed
in 13 circles. El-Mesihi, in his History, says that Lower Egypt contains 1,439 villages. The total of
the villages of the Said and the Delta would therefore be 2,395.

The cadi Abou Abd Allah Mohammed ben Salamat El-Qoda'i says: The land of Egypt divides into two parts:
the Said, on the side from which comes the south wind, and the Delta, on the side from which the north
wind blows. The Said is divided into twenty-eight circles, which are: a circle comprising the whole
Fayoum; the two circles of Memphis and of Ousim; the circle of Sharqieh; the two circles of Dallas and
of Abousir; the circle of Ahnas; the two circles of Feshn and of Behnesa; the circle of Taha; the
district of Senoudah; the circle of Bouit; the circles of Achmounein and of Antinoe, lower and upper, of
Shotb, of Qous-Qam; the circle of Siout; the circle of Qahqouah; the circles of Akhmim, of El-Deir, and
of Abchaïa; the circle of Hou, of Qena, of Faou, of Denderah; the circle of Qoft and of Luxor; the
circle of Esna and of Erment, and the circle of Assouan. Such are the circles of the Said.

As for those of the Delta, they number twenty-five, or, according to other copies, thirty-three or even
thirty-eight. These circles are: in the eastern Houf, the circles of Athribis and of Heliopolis; those
of Bena and of Nama; the circles of Basta and of Tarabiah; the circle of Horbeit; the circles of Sa and
of Ablil; the circle of Farama, of El-Arich, and of El-Gofar; in the Belly of the countryside, which is
also part of the Delta: the circle of Beba and of Bousir; the circles of Samanoud and of Bousa; the
circles of El-Osiah and of Negoum; the circle of Dakahlah; the circles of Tennis and of Damietta; one
must join to it also the circle of the islands in front of the Delta; the circle of Mesis and of Menouf;
the circle of Touah and of Menouf; the circle of Sakha, of Beidah, and of El-Afrahoun; the circle of
Moqin and of Disa and the circle of Bachroud; in the western Houf: the circle of Sa; the circle

[PDF p. 242]

of Shabas; the circle of Yadkoun and its district; the circle of El-Kheïs and of El-Sherak; the circle
of Kharbata; the circle of Qortesa, of Mesil, and of Melidis; the circles of Akhna, of Behera, and of
Rosetta; the circle of Alexandria; the circle of Mariout; the circle of Libya and of Maraqieh.

Among the circles of the south, one comprises also the circle of the Hedjaz, which bears the name of the
circle of Tor, and that of Faran; the circle of Raïat and of Qolzoum; the circle of Aïlat and its
district; that of Madian and its district; that of El-Ounid; that of El-Hour and its district; finally
the circles of Bada and of Shaghb.

Whoever occupies himself with the affairs of the tax and the divans knows an old list, written in the
hand of Ibn Aïssa Boqtor ben Shegha, the Coptic writer known under the name of Bolos, who was at the
head of the taxes of Egypt in the time of the dynasty of El-Akhshidi. This list embraces the nomes of
Egypt and the villages up to the year 345 [15 April 956 to 3 April 957]; these villages, as much for the
Said as for the Delta, number two thousand three hundred ninety-five, of which nine hundred fifty-six
for the Said and one thousand four hundred thirty-nine for the Delta. Such was the number of villages at
the period when the list in question was drawn up. But this number has been modified as a consequence of
the annihilation of the ruined parts of Egypt.

Ibn Abd El-Hakam reports, on the authority of El-Leitz ben Sa'd, that El-Oualid ben Refaat, being
governor of Egypt, made the census of the inhabitants of Egypt, in order to distribute the tax
equitably. Accompanied by a multitude of writers and aides charged with seconding him by their vigor and
energy, he took six months to count Upper Egypt, which he traversed as far as Assouan, and three months
to count Lower Egypt. More than ten thousand villages were counted, without comprising in this figure the
hamlets peopled with fewer than five hundred heads of men liable to pay the capitation tax. The latter
amounted to five million men.

Under the reign of El-Naser Mohammed ben Qalaoun, the division of the southern part of Egypt into six
provinces was rigorously maintained; these six provinces were: Qous, the largest of all, with Assouan and
the western part of Qamoulah; the province of Akhmim, comprising those of

[PDF p. 243]

Siout, of Manfalout, and of Achmounein, the latter enclosing the Tahaouïeh; the province of the western
Behnesaouïeh, with the villages situated on the western bank of the Menha, the canal that heads toward
the Fayoum; the province of the Fayoum; that of Atfih and that of Ghizeh; in the northern part of Egypt
six other provinces: the Behera, which skirts the sea, encompassing Alexandria and Barca; the Gharbieh,
formed of a single island enclosed between the two arms of the river -- the one that empties into the sea
at Damietta and called the "eastern branch," and the one that empties into the sea at Rosetta and is
called the "western branch"; the Menoufieh, comprising the wells and the island of the Beni Naser; the
province of Qalioub; that of Sharqieh; that of Asmoum Tenah, embracing the Dakahlieh and the Mourtahieh.
In this region are the ports of Bourlos and of Rosetta, Mansourah, Alexandria, Damietta, and their
provinces.

As for the oases, they form a territory apart, to the southwest; one does not count them among the
provinces and the vilayets; and it is not a vali of the sultan who administers them: they are left under
the direction of the one to whom they are attributed in fief. And God is the most knowing!

[PDF p. 244]

CHAPTER XXVI
OF THE WAY IN WHICH ONE WENT ABOUT IT IN EGYPT TO DIG THE CANALS AND RAISE THE DIKES, ETC., INTENDED TO
RETAIN THE WATER OF THE NILE AND DISTRIBUTE IT AT THE OPPORTUNE TIME

Ibn Abd El-Hakam reports, on the authority of Yezid ben Abou Habib, that the Egyptians assigned to the
cleaning of the canals and the upkeep of the dikes one hundred twenty thousand men who, furnished with
axes, hoes, and the necessary tools, remained constantly occupied with this work without interrupting
it, winter or summer.

Some old Egyptians, says Abou Qabil, claim that in the time of the kings, the villages were left under
the direct authority of their inhabitants, each village paying a determined due that was changed only
every four years, as a consequence of the reverses and the displacements of fortune that might have
occurred. When four years had elapsed, the old distribution of the taxes was annulled and a new one was
established, diminishing the due of those who really ought to be exonerated and increasing that of the
individuals who could bear an increase, without however overwhelming the latter with too-heavy charges.
Once the tax was collected and centralized, a quarter of the total sum was attributed to the king; the
king was the master in full property of this quarter and disposed of it as he saw fit; a second quarter
was assigned to the army and served for the pay of those who aided the king in his wars, and for the
salary of the individuals charged with collecting the tax and repulsing the enemy; the third quarter was
intended for the improvement of the lands -- the tracing of canals, the construction of dikes and
bridges, aid to the agriculturists for the cultivations and the good upkeep of their lands; finally the
fourth quarter was distributed among all the villages, in proportion to the tax each of them had paid,
and the sums thus distributed were buried to serve later in case of reverses or calamities that might
have struck the inhabitants of that village; this is what the ancient Egyptians did, and the sums buried
in each village constitute what is [...]

[PDF p. 245]

called the treasures of Pharaoh, treasures that, according to popular belief, must reappear one day or
another. This is why certain people make a profession of discovering them and apply themselves to
searching for them.

A certain Pharaoh, it is said, took in as taxes seventy-two million dinars; it is this same Pharaoh
who, to assure himself of the good cultivation of the lands, sent an oueïba of wheat into Upper and
Lower Egypt, at the moment of the weeding of the fields and the repair of the canals, without one
finding a space of empty land where it could be sown. Toward the end of the cultivations, it is said
again, this Pharaoh sent four oueïbas of bersim (clover) seed into Upper and Lower Egypt, and into all
the provinces; and if one found an empty terrain where this quantity of seed could be sown, the head of
the governor of the province was cut off. The cultivated part of Egypt was then forty square parasangs.
The parasang is worth three miles and the barid four parasangs; that made therefore a total of ten
square barids. The Pharaohs continued to act in this manner until the time of the Pharaoh of Moses, who
filled Egypt with justice and equity. Under his reign there was a dearth that lasted three years, and,
during these three years, the people were exempted from taxes, and the Pharaoh provided himself, from
his own purse, for his own maintenance and that of the troops. But the fourth year, he doubled the tax
and maintained this increase until he had recovered his expenses.

Omar ben El-Khattab wrote to Amr ben El-As: "Ask El-Maqoqos whence come the prosperity and the ruin of
Egypt." Amr therefore questioned El-Maqoqos on this subject, and the latter answered him: "The
prosperity of Egypt and its ruin may be attributed to five causes: the tax must be collected from the
moment when the agriculturists have finished the cultivations until the one when the harvest of the
vine is finished; one must each year dredge the canals, close the water-intakes, and repair the dikes;
finally one must not accept the delays of people who give only mendacious excuses; if one acts thus,
Egypt is prosperous; if not, it is ruined."

Zeïd ben Aslam reports this, on the authority of his father: "Omar ben El-Khattab, finding that Amr ben
El-As was slow to send him the tax, wrote to him to dispatch him an Egyptian. Amr sent him an old Copt
of whom Omar asked information on Egypt and its revenues before Islam. The old man said to him:

[PDF p. 246]

'O Commander of the Faithful, no tax was levied in Egypt as long as the cultivations were not in good
state, but your lieutenant occupies himself in no way with the cultivations and collects the tax at his
pleasure as if he wished to collect revenues only for one year.' Omar understood what the old man meant
and accepted the excuses that Amr gave him."

Amr ben El-As said to El-Maqoqos: "You who have governed Egypt, tell me what renders it prosperous." "Its
prosperity," answered El-Maqoqos, "depends on many causes; one must dredge the canals, consolidate the
dikes and the water-intakes, levy tax only on the harvests, not accept the delays that individuals
propose, respect the established conventions, shower the governors with favors -- for fear that they
accept gifts and draw from the inhabitants presents or aids, which would weaken the latter accordingly;
in this way Egypt will be prosperous and one will be able to count on the taxes."

It is recounted that the indigenous sovereigns had divided the revenues of the country into four parts:
one was the property of the king; the second served to defray the army; the third was intended for the
putting into condition of the lands; finally, the fourth was reserved to meet the unfortunate events
that might occur.

'Obeïd Allah ben El-Haggab, being intendant of the finances of Egypt for the account of Hescham ben Abd
El-Melek, went himself to measure all the lands of Egypt, cultivated or not cultivated, that the flood
of the Nile reached, and he found that these terrains represented a surface of a hundred million
feddans. On the other hand, it is said that Ahmed ben Moudabber, having measured the terrain proper for
cultivation in Egypt, found that it represented a surface of twenty-four million feddans; the rest was
submerged and impossible to cultivate. He also evaluated the time necessary for the cultivation and he
found that this time comprised sixty days; each agriculturist cultivating fifty feddans, it required, to
cultivate Egypt, four hundred eighty thousand cultivators.

[PDF p. 247]

CHAPTER XXVII
OF THE SUM OF THE REVENUES OF EGYPT IN ANCIENT TIMES

Ibn Ouacif Shah says: Monqaous divided the revenues of the country into four parts: one quarter for the
king, who did with it what he wished; another quarter assigned to the expenses necessitated by the
improvement of the lands, the repair of the dikes, the dredging of the canals, and the aid to be given to
the inhabitants for the cultivation; one quarter was buried in anticipation of unfortunate events that
might occur; the last quarter was assigned to the army. At this period, the revenues of the country rose
to a hundred three million dinars, coming from a hundred three districts, a million per district. Each
of these dinars was worth, it is said, ten of our Muslim mithqals. Today, Egypt is divided into
eighty-five nomes, forty-five for Lower Egypt and forty for the Said; each of these nomes is administered
by a priest and a military chief. Under the reign of Nadares ben Sa, the revenues of the country reached
a hundred fifty million dinars, and in the time of Kalkun ben Kharbata ben Maliq ben Nadares, they were
still a hundred and some tens of millions of dinars. When the government of the first Egyptians had
ceased and the country was governed by the Amalekites, the state of Egypt was less flourishing, and the
first Pharaoh (Shepherd) took in ninety million dinars, on which were levied ten million dinars for the
improvement of the country, ten million dinars for the maintenance of the personnel of the king's
children and of persons of (good) condition but poor, ten million dinars for the personnel charged with
affairs, for the army and the employees, and ten million dinars for the maintenance of the Pharaoh; the
rest, fifty million dinars, was put in reserve for the Pharaoh.

In the time of El-Raïan ben El-Oualid, the Pharaoh of Joseph, the revenue reached ninety-seven million
dinars, but this prince, wishing to reach the full hundred million dinars, prescribed putting into use
all the kinds

[PDF p. 248]

of cultivation possible, repairing the dikes, and extending the cultivated terrains, so well that this
sum was reached and even exceeded.

Ibn Lahiat says: The sum collected in Egypt during the period of the Pharaohs (Shepherds) reached ninety
million dinars, in pharaonic dinars each equivalent to three of the mithqals known today in Egypt and
which divide each into twenty-four qirats, each qirat weighing three grains of wheat. According to this
reckoning, the aforesaid sum would represent two hundred seventy million Egyptian dinars.

El-Sherif El-Gouani declares that he found in one of the temples of Upper Egypt a text written in the
Sahidic language and which had been translated into Arabic; this text gave the detail of the sums
collected by the Pharaoh of Joseph, El-Raïan ben El-Oualid, as taxes levied in Egypt on objects really
struck with tax or under any title whatever during one year, according to equity, justice, and
established usage, without malevolence, false interpretation, or discussion regarding the difference that
might exist between the sum collected and the quantity of taxable matters found in the possession of the
taxed; this sum, without speaking of the one that one was accustomed to set apart in anticipation of
calamities to come, or to aid the workers and improve their lot, amounted in gold to twenty-four million
six hundred thousand dinars. And what El-Sherif reports agrees with what El-Hassan ben Ali El-Asdi says.

El-Hassan ben Ali El-Asdi reports this: "My father recounted to me having found in a Coptic book, written
in the Sahidic language and translated into Arabic, the sum of the revenues collected by the Pharaoh of
Egypt in real taxes levied on the taxed matters or under any title whatever for an entire year, according
to justice and equity, without malevolence or discussion regarding the difference that might exist
between the sums collected and the quantity of taxable matters found in the possession of the taxed; this
sum, after having set aside the funds necessary to meet eventualities, to succor and aid the workers,
amounted in gold to twenty-four million four hundred thousand dinars, representing the revenues of all
Egypt; of this sum one employed for the cultivation of the country, the dredging of the canals, the
repair of the dikes and the water-intakes, the upkeep of the roads, the functioning of the
administration, indispensable aid to the agriculturists, the establishment of works, the enlargement of

[PDF p. 249]

the cultivations, etc., the purchase of tools, the salary of mercenaries, the transport of materials --
in a word for all the expenses the cultivation of the country required -- eight hundred thousand dinars
of gold; for the costs entailed by the salary of the employees charged with affairs and of the army, for
the army itself, for the slaves and the families (of the soldiers), as well as for a thousand writers
assigned to the ministries, without counting their servants, such as cashiers and other similar
employees, whose number rises to eleven thousand men, eight million dinars in gold; for the widows and
the orphans inscribed at the treasury -- even though they might not be in need, and so that they might
always be able to count on the generosity of the king -- four hundred thousand dinars in gold; for the
priests, the temples and their personnel, the houses of prayer, one hundred thousand dinars in gold; for
the alms (one cried among the people: "Let those who are poor not be ashamed to uncover themselves!" and
none of those who presented themselves was repulsed; the employees charged with the distribution sat
down, and as soon as they perceived a man they were not accustomed to see, they had him set apart, after
having given him what was due to him; the money exhausted, these poor were gathered in great number, and
one of the intimates of Pharaoh went to him, congratulated him on having distributed all the money, and
one prayed God for the salvation and the life of the king; one gave him details on the position of these
people, and the Pharaoh gave orders that their miserable state be attenuated by giving them baths and
garments; tables were set where the poor ate and drank, then one asked each of them the cause of his
misery; if this misery was due to the misfortune of the times, one gave back to the unfortunate the
equivalent of what he had had and even more; if, on the contrary, his misery was only the result of bad
management or too weak a character, one entrusted the incapable man to a person who was to serve as his
guardian and occupy himself with his affairs until he had put them back in order) -- two hundred thousand
dinars in gold. And here is the total of the sums detailed above for the different uses of which we have
spoken: nine million eight hundred thousand dinars. One must take account, in addition, of what Pharaoh
kept in his treasury, to face calamities and eventual misfortunes: fourteen million six hundred thousand
dinars in gold.

[PDF p. 250]

One asked someone: "At what period did Egypt produce ninety million dinars?" "At the period," he
answered, "when Pharaoh sent an oueïba of wheat into the Delta and the Said, without finding sufficient
place to sow it, because all the country was put under cultivation."

[PDF p. 251]

CHAPTER XXVIII
HOW THE MUSLIMS ORGANIZED THE TAXES, AT THE MOMENT OF THE CONQUEST OF EGYPT, AND OF THE SITUATION IN
WHICH EGYPT AND THE COPTS FOUND THEMSELVES IN THIS REGARD

Zoheir ben Moawiah says: Souahil reported to me this, which he had from his father, to whom Abou
Houraïrat had recounted it: The Prophet of God said: "Iraq has kept its dirhem and its qafiz; Syria has
kept its medd and its dinar; Egypt has kept its ardeb, and you have returned to your first state."
According to Abou Obeïd, the Prophet wished to speak of things not yet accomplished but already existing
in the decrees of God; and he expressed himself in the past, for these things had already passed into
the decrees of God; in speaking of them before their accomplishment, he proved the authenticity of his
prophetic mission and gave his approval to the taxes established by Omar on the tributary Christians
inhabiting the conquered provinces.

These words are explained in two ways: either the Prophet would have known in advance that the cited
countries would convert to Islam, that they would be freed from taxes, and that, having become Muslims,
they would no longer have to pay tribute, which explains the words: "You will return to your first
state"; or else these countries would free themselves from obedience. But the first explanation is the
best.

Ibn Abd El-Hakam reports, on the authority of Abd Allah ben Lahiat, that after the conquest of Egypt by
Amr ben El-As, it was agreed that all the inhabitants of the country having reached their majority --
without counting the women, the children, and the old men -- would pay two dinars per head; the count
was made and the sum reached eight million dinars.

Hecham ben Abou Raqiat El-Lakhmi recounts that after the conquest of Egypt, Amr ben El-As said to the
Copts: "If anyone among you hides treasures in his house and I come to discover it, I will put him to
death." Now, a Copt of the Said,

[PDF p. 252]

named Botros, was denounced to Amr as having a treasure in his house. The man, summoned and questioned,
denied and protested. He was put in prison, and Amr asked whether he had not been heard to speak of
someone. "No," it was answered; "we have heard him speak only of a monk who dwells at Tor." Amr then
sent to Botros a man who took his seal from him, then he wrote to this monk: "Send me what you have in
your keeping," and he signed the letter with the seal of Botros. The messenger returned with a Syrian
flask sealed with lead. Amr opened it and found in it a sheet of paper bearing these words: "Your money
is under the great basin." One went to this basin, whose water was emptied; the slab of the bottom was
removed and, under this slab, was found fifty-two ardebs of minted Egyptian gold. Amr had the head of
Botros cut off at the door of the mosque. The Copts then brought their treasures, for fear of being
denounced by one among them and being put to death as Botros had been.

According to Yezid ben Abou Habib, Amr ben El-As acted thus with the treasures of this Copt only because
he was persuaded that he denounced to the Greeks the weak points of the Muslims and wrote to them on
this subject, and he drew from him more than fifty ardebs of dinars.

Ibn Abd El-Hakam says that Amr ben El-As sent to Omar ben El-Khattab the tribute after having retained
what was necessary to him; and the regulation of Egypt comprised, for the dredging of the canals, the
repair of the dikes, the construction of the bridges, and the upkeep of the islands, one hundred twenty
thousand men furnished with shovels, hoes, and tools, relaying one another at this work without
interruption, winter and summer.

Omar ben El-Khattab wrote to Amr: "You will mark with a lead seal at the neck the people of the
protection; they must wear this insignia in an apparent manner; their hair must be cut on the forehead,
and they will ride seated on asses. The tax will be established only on those who have already undergone
the razor; it will not be on the women or the children, and you will not permit them to wear a costume
similar to that of the Muslims."

Yezid ben Aslam, speaking of Omar ben El-Khattab, says: "It was written to the emirs of the armies to
strike with tax only the people who had already undergone the razor; to exact forty dirhems from those
who would pay in silver and four dinars from those who would pay in gold; moreover, those who were to
furnish the wheat and the oil to the Muslims were held to bring two medd of wheat and three qosat of oil
per month and

[PDF p. 253]

per head; this clause concerns the Syrians and the people of Mesopotamia who, in addition, were obliged
to furnish I no longer know what quantity of fat and honey; as for the Egyptians, they were to give per
month and per head one ardeb and I know not how much fat and honey; it was they too who were to furnish
the garment of silk intended to clothe the Commander of the Faithful; they owed in addition a
hospitality of three days to every Muslim who would lodge with them; the inhabitants of Iraq were to
furnish per head fifteen sa' and I know not how much fat. The women and the children were exempt from
taxes; and all the people subject to the tax wore a seal at the neck. The oueïba of Omar, during the
government of Amr ben El-As, was six medd.

When his authority was well affirmed, Amr ben El-As charged Copts with collecting the tax owed by the
Greeks; the tax in Egypt was subject to certain modifications: if a village was prosperous and the
number of inhabitants had increased, the tax was raised; if, on the contrary, the number of inhabitants
had diminished and the country was in ruin, the taxes were diminished. The principal men of each
village, the emirs and the chiefs of the inhabitants gathered and discussed, examining whether there
was prosperity or decadence, and if they had fixed some increase of the tax, they withdrew into their
districts, and there, gathered with the chiefs of the district, this increase was distributed according
to the importance of each village and the extent of its cultivations. Then each village gathered its
inhabitants, and in this assembly, the sum of the increase being known, a proportion was established
between this increase added to the ordinary tax and the ensemble of the cultivated terrains. One then
set to work, withdrawing first from the ensemble of the cultivated lands the feddans belonging to the
churches and those assigned to the upkeep of the baths and the ferries, then a certain number of feddans
to compensate for the hospitality to be given to the Muslims and to the king, if by chance he came. That
done, one counted the number of artisans and mercenaries in each village and attributed to them a part
of the increase, according to what they could bear, and it was very rare that this increase fell on
others than young men or married men; one then verified what remained to be paid of the tax and
distributed it according to the quantity of lands cultivated by each; these lands themselves were
divided among those who desired to cultivate them and who had the strength for it. If anyone among them

[PDF p. 254]

complained of his powerlessness to cultivate his lands, the lands he could not cultivate were divided
among those who could do it; to the latter were given the lands that the too-weak people had been unable
to cultivate. If some disagreement arose, one divided according to the number. Their dinars were divided
into qirats, each dinar containing twenty-four; the land was divided likewise. This is why it is
reported that the Prophet said: "You will conquer a land where one counts by qirats; treat its
inhabitants well." And each feddan was imposed with a due of half an ardeb of wheat and two oueïba of
barley; only the qorz (fruit of the sont/acacia) was not struck with tax; the oueïba contains six medd.
Omar ben El-Khattab took from those with whom he had made a treaty what they themselves had proposed to
give, without ever increasing or diminishing it; for those who, subject to the tax, had fixed nothing
themselves, Omar examined their situation: if they were poor, they were struck with a light tax; if they
were rich, they were taxed according to their wealth.

Hecham ben Abou Raqiat El-Lakhmi says: The governor of Akhna came to Amr ben El-As and said to him:
"Tell us what each of us must pay as tax and we will conform to it." Amr, pointing to the corner of a
church, answered: "If you bring me a heap (of money reaching) from the floor to the ceiling, I have
nothing to say to you, but for us you are a storehouse; if much is demanded of us, we will demand much
of you; if little is demanded of us, we will demand little of you." Whoever believes in the veracity of
this tradition believes also that Egypt was conquered by force.

According to Yezid ben Abou Habib, Omar ben Abd el-Aziz said: Whoever embraces Islam saves, by his
conversion, both his soul and his wealth; as for the land, it is part of what God has given to the
Muslims. Whoever has made a treaty, by means of tribute, will pay it, and all those who, among the
people having made this treaty, will have embraced Islam, will see their land and their house pass into
other hands.

El-Leitz says: Yahia ben Saïd wrote me this: If, to pay the tax justly levied on him, someone sells his
male or female slaves, his camels, his cows, or his mounts, that is permitted to him and the buyer is
not held to restitution, even though the former possessor were rich; but for the land, the renting of it
is permitted only insofar as this renting will not be prejudicial [...]

[PDF p. 255]

to the tax with which the proprietor is struck; if the contract harms the tax, the land will be restored
to its proprietor; if, on the contrary, the price of the renting exceeds the sum of the tax, one may
consider this renting as permitted to the one who consents to it.

Yahia adds: We say that the tax is of two sorts: capitation tax and general tax, the latter established
on the ensemble of the inhabitants of a village, who all participate in it. If in a village a particular
person comes to die of those whom the general tax reaches -- any tax other than the personal one -- and
this person has died without children or heirs, his lands, with all the taxes they comprise, revert to
the village. As for the one who dies without leaving heirs and who was subject to the capitation, his
land reverts to the Muslims. El-Leitz says, on the authority of Omar ben Abd el-Aziz, that the tax is
personal and has nothing in common with the land; he means there the people subject to the protection.

Omar ben Abd el-Aziz wrote to Heïan ben Sharaïh to transfer the tax payable by a deceased Copt onto the
head of his brother; this proves that Omar was of the opinion that Egypt had been conquered by force and
that, the tax striking only the villages, if one of the inhabitants of that village came to die, the tax
was maintained integrally on the others, the death of one of them entailing in no way a diminution of
the tax. It is probable, however, that Egypt was conquered by treaty and that this treaty was maintained
intact for the Egyptians who came later, so that the death of one of them could not harm the sum
stipulated in the convention.

El-Leitz says: Omar ben Abd el-Aziz exempted from taxes those of the Egyptians subject to the protection
who had embraced Islam, and attributed to them the same privileges as to those who had converted to
Islam from the first day and to those who had converted at his own hands. Before him the tax of the
converts was collected. The first to levy the tax on those of the people having embraced Islam was
El-Haggag ben Youssef. Abd el-Melek ben Merwan having written to Abd el-Aziz ben Merwan to tax the people
of the protection who had become Muslim, Ibn Hageïrat spoke to him on this subject and said to him: "May
God preserve you, O emir, from being the first to establish such a tax in Egypt, for, by God! if any
people of the protection owe the tax, it is those among them who are monks. How

[PDF p. 256]

could we establish the tax on those who have become Muslim!" And the emir abandoned this project.

Omar ben Abd el-Aziz wrote to Heïan ben Shoraïh: Discharge from the tax those of the protected who will
have embraced Islam, for God has said: "If they convert, if they practice prayer and almsgiving, let them
follow their life in peace, for God is indulgent and merciful" (Koran, IX, 5). He said also: "Fight those
who believe neither in God nor in the last day and do not consider as forbidden what God and his apostle
have forbidden, and for those among the sectaries of the Book (the Gospels) who do not practice justice,
fight them until they all pay the tribute and are humiliated" (Koran, IX, 29).

Heïan ben Shoraïh wrote to Omar ben Abd el-Aziz: "The conversions to Islam have done such harm to the
tax that I have had to borrow from El-Haretz ben Tabeta twenty thousand dinars with which I will complete
the pay of the employees of the divans, and if the Commander of the Faithful is of the opinion that I
take them (from the new converts) and wishes to give me the order, let him give it to me!" Omar answered
him: "Your letter has reached me. I had established you vali of the army of Egypt, but I recognize your
incapacity, and I have given the order to my messenger to strike you twenty blows on the head. Discharge
from the tax those who have converted to Islam. By God! your opinion is very bad, for God sent Mohammed
as a guide and not as a cashier. By my life! Omar is far too unhappy to have the joy of seeing all men
embrace Islam under his government!"

Omar ben El-Khattab, finding that Amr ben El-As was slow to send him the tribute, wrote to him: "In the
name of the clement and merciful God! From the servant of God, Commander of the Faithful, to Amr ben
El-As; may God save you! I glorify God for you; there is no God but he! I have reflected on your affair
and your situation. Your land is a vast, spacious, and fertile land, and God has made its inhabitants
numerous, patient, and strong on the land and on the sea. Certainly the Pharaohs took great care of it
and executed there magnificent works, despite their extreme violence and impiety; I have been marveled
at it, but what surprises me most is that this land no longer renders today the half of what the tax
formerly produced, and yet there is neither drought nor dearth. In your letter, you speak to me at
length of the state of the tax in your region, and I hoped that the tribute would arrive to me without
delay, thinking that you would wake up and

[PDF p. 257]

send it to me. And here you send me only excuses that are far from agreeing with what I myself think. I
will accept from you nothing other than what you had collected of tax before. Moreover, I do not see what
my letter has that is frightening and capable of making you anxious. If you were an experienced, capable,
and wise man, you would know that innocence is indispensable, but if you are only ill-advised and
clumsy, I conclude from it that the matter must be quite other than you report it. I did not wish to
renew the reproaches I addressed to you last year, hoping that you would wake up and send me the tribute,
for I know that this dispatch is delayed by a single cause: your governors are bad governors who
circumvent and deceive you by taking you for a refuge. But, thanks to God, I have for this a good remedy
that I beg you to employ, and you will not be displeased with it, O Abou Abd Allah: it is to pay what you
owe and take what is due to you; for the sea produces the pearls and the truth is limpid; leave me, then,
and tell me no more foolishness, for what was hidden has been brought to light. Farewell!"

Amr ben El-As answered: "In the name of the clement and merciful God! To the servant of God, Omar,
Commander of the Faithful, from Amr ben El-As, the salvation of God be upon you! I pray God for you;
there is no God but he! I have received, O Commander of the Faithful, the letter in which you complain
of my slowness to send you the tribute, recall to me what the Pharaohs did before me, and are astonished
at the revenues Egypt produced in their hands and at the diminution of these revenues since Islam. By my
life, it is true that then the revenues were greater and higher, the land being better cultivated, for
these Pharaohs, despite their impiety and their violence, showed more ardor for the cultivation of their
soil than we have shown since Islam. The sea produces the pearls, you say; for my part I have milked
this country so much and so much that its udders are dried up. You exaggerate in your letter, you
reprimand me at length and cover me with dust, warning me that this delay is due to causes that an
unskilled man cannot discover. Your letter is full of contained allusions, but you would have done
better to employ words cutting as the sword, brilliant as the truth. I have served as lieutenant of the
Prophet and of his successors, and always, I render thanks to God for it, I have faithfully rendered the
deposits entrusted to me, always I have safeguarded the right sacred in the eyes

[PDF p. 258]

of God, esteeming that to act otherwise was infamous and disastrous. Recognize that in me and have
confidence in my heart. God preserve me from eating such a dish, may he keep my character from this
perversity and from any audacity against all that has been accomplished. Do, then, what pleases you, but
God preserve me from this vile nourishment and from such an inclination, especially after your letter in
which you have not spared my honor and have treated so little generously a brother! By my life, O Ibn
el-Khattab, if anyone had made me such propositions, my soul would have been swollen with anger, for it
is worthy and generous, and I have never committed actions that could dishonor it. But I know things you
are ignorant of, and were I a Jew of Yatreb (Medina) I would say no more of it. I pray God to pardon you
and to pardon me also; I have kept silent things I knew, and my tongue, on this occasion, has been
docile. But may God make grow what he knows of your justice!"

Omar ben El-Khattab answered: "From Omar ben El-Khattab to Amr ben El-As; salvation be upon you! I pray
God for you; there is no God but he! I am surprised at the quantity of letters I must write you on the
subject of your delay in sending me the tribute; your answer is ambiguous. You know that I exact of you
only what is manifestly just, and that I did not place you at the head of Egypt so that this country
might become your prey and that of your people; I called you to this post counting that you would send
me the tribute and trusting in your wise policy. On receipt of my letter, send the tribute; it is the
property of the Muslims, and in my entourage, you know it, there are unfortunate people. Farewell!"

Amr ben El-As answered: "In the name of the powerful and merciful God! To Omar ben El-Khattab from Amr
ben El-As, salvation be upon you! I pray God for you, there is no God but he! The letter of the Commander
of the Faithful has reached me, in which he complains of my slowness to send the tribute and accuses me
of disguising the truth and employing subterfuges. By God, I do not depart from the conventions you
know; but the people of the country have begged me to wait until the grains are ripe. I referred the
matter to the Muslims, who are of the opinion that it is better to show oneself gentle to the
inhabitants than to tear them apart, for they would be obliged to sell what is indispensable to them.
Farewell!"

El-Leitz ben Sa'd said: The amount of the tax collected by Amr ben El-As was twelve million dinars;
before him El-Maqoqos collected per year twenty million

[PDF p. 259]

dinars. This is why Omar ben El-Khattab wrote to Amr the letters (reported above). The revenue collected
by Abd Allah ben Sa'd ben Sarah, after Othman had installed him as governor of Egypt, rose to fourteen
million dinars, and Othman said to Amr ben El-As, already deposed: "O Abou Abd Allah, the she-camel has
given more milk than before." "But you have harmed the young one," answered Amr. "The young one is not
dead," added Othman. Moawiah ben Abou Safian wrote to Ouardan, intendant of the treasury of Egypt:
"Increase the tax of each Copt by one qirat." Ouardan answered: "How increase them, since it is agreed
that they will be increased in nothing?" Ouardan was deposed by Moawiah, but it is said that the reasons
for his deposition were quite different.

Ibn Lahiat says: In the time of Moawiah, the ministries counted forty thousand employees, of whom four
thousand received each two hundred dinars. Moslema ben Meglid paid the employees of the ministries their
appointments, as well as those of their families and their food expenses; he paid also the expenses
entailed by the needs of the country, such as repairs of dikes, salary of the writers, transport of the
wheat to the Hedjaz, and he sent Moawiah the rest -- that is, six hundred thousand dinars.

Ibn Afir says: As the camels were on the road, Barah ben Kachal El-Mohri met them and said to the
camel-drivers: "What is that, and why does our wealth leave our country? Return!" They returned,
therefore, and stopped at the door of the mosque. There he said to them: "Have you received your salary
and your food and the salary of your families?" "Yes," it was answered. "In that case," said Barah, "may
the blessing not be with them. Take them away!" And the camel-drivers set out with the tribute.

Someone has said: The revenues collected by Amr ben El-As reached ten thousand [thousands] of dinars,
and Omar ben El-Khattab wrote to him, reproaching him for having harvested so little and saying: "The
Greeks collected twenty million dinars." The following year Amr ben El-As collected twelve million
dinars.

Ibn Lahiat says: "Amr ben El-As collected at Alexandria alone six hundred thousand dinars, for there
were there three hundred thousand persons subject to the protection and paying each two dinars. And God
is the most knowing!"

[PDF p. 260]

CHAPTER XXIX
OF THE UPRISINGS OF THE COPTS AND WHAT CAME OF THEM

The imam Abou Abdallah Mohammed ben Ismaïl El-Bokhari extracted from the traditions relating to Abou
Houraïrat this: The latter said: "What will become of you when you no longer collect either dinars or
dirhems?" "How will we see that?" Abou Houraïrat was asked. "Certainly," he answered, "by him in whose
hands is the soul of Abou Houraïrat, according to the veracious words of a just man." "On what
account?" he was asked. "The engagement toward God and toward his Prophet will be disdained, the people
subject to the protection will see their heart hardened by God and will refuse to give what they
possess."

Abou Amr Mohammed ben Youssef El-Kandi, in his book on the Emirs of Egypt, says: Under the government of
El-Hourr ben Youssef, emir of Egypt, Abd Allah ben El-Habhab, intendant of the treasuries, wrote to
Hecham ben Abd el-Melek: "The land of Egypt can bear an increase (of taxes)," and each dinar of tax was
increased by a qirat. Then the provinces of Tenoudimi, of Horbeit, of Tarabiat, as well as the greater
part of the eastern Houf, revolted. El-Hourr sent against them the soldiers of the divan, who beat them
and killed a great number. It is the first revolt of the Copts of Egypt; it took place in the year 107
[19 May 725 to 7 May 726]. El-Hourr occupied Damietta militarily for three months.

Later, in the year 121 [18 December 738 to 6 December 739], the people of the Said rose and took up arms
against their governors; Hamzalah ben Safouan, emir of Egypt, dispatched against them the army of the
divan, which killed a great number of Copts and beat them.

Another time, a Copt of Samanoud, named Bagish, rose; Abd el-Melek ben Merwan sent against him Mousa ben
Nasir, emir of Egypt, and Ba-

[PDF p. 261]

gish was killed with a great number of his companions. This happened in the year 132 [20 August 749 to 8
August 750].

The Copts of Rosetta revolted, and Merwan ben Mohammed El-Ga'di, who was then entering Egypt fleeing the
Abbasids, sent against them Othman ben Abou Qossa'at, who beat them.

In the year 150 [6 February 767 to 25 January 768], the Copts of the province of Sakha rose against
Yezid ben Hatem ben Qebisat ben El-Mohleb ben Aben Safrat, emir of Egypt, attacked the governors, and
chased them out. Arrived at Choubra-Sounbat, they were joined by the people of Yeshroud, of El-Arisia't,
and of Negoum. Yezid ben Hatem, informed of their approach, designated Naser ben Habib El-Mohallabi as
chief of the army of the divan and of the principal men of Egypt. This army marched against the
insurgents, but the latter were victorious and made a great carnage among the Muslims; the latter, after
having burned the Coptic encampment, fell back in rout on Masr.

Under the valiyat of Mousa ben Ali ben Rebah, in the year 156 [2 December 772 to 20 November 773], the
Copts of Belbeïs revolted; an army marched against them and beat them.

Then, in the year 216 [18 February 831 to 6 February 832], took place the great revolt of the Copts;
El-Afshin defeated them in the vicinity of Yashroud and constrained them to make submission to the
Commander of the Faithful, Abd Allah El-Mamoun, who condemned the men to death and the women and
children to be sold; and most of them were sold.

Since then God has maintained the Copts of Egypt in obedience, the grievances have been smoothed over,
and today it is no longer permitted to any Copt of Egypt to revolt or hold his head up against the
sultan. The Muslims became masters of the villages, and subsequently the Copts resumed their habits of
cunning, perfidy, and duplicity against Islam and took their revenge by laying hands on the registers of
the tax. There have moreover passed between them and the Muslims events of which, God willing, one will
find the account at the proper place in this book.

[PDF p. 262]

CHAPTER XXX
OF THE ARRIVAL OF THE ARABS IN THE COUNTRYSIDE OF EGYPT, HOW THEY SEIZED THE CULTIVATIONS TO LIVE, AND
WHAT EVENTS ACCOMPANIED THEIR ARRIVAL

While El-Oualid ben Rafe'at El-Fahmi was vali of Egypt, the tribe of Qeïs transported itself to Egypt in
the year 109 [28 April 727 to 15 April 728]. Before, no individual of this tribe was in Egypt, with the
exception of some representatives of the families of Fahm and of 'Adouan. Ibn El-Habhab went to Hecham
ben Abd el-Melek and asked him to permit some of their families to transport themselves to Egypt. Hecham
authorized three thousand of them to come settle in this country and install their divans there, on the
condition that they would not reside at Fostat. Ibn El-Habhab therefore returned to the people of Qeïs
and, having brought them with him, installed them in the eastern Houf, where they dispersed. It is
reported that Obeïd Allah ben El-Habhab, after having been named vali of Egypt by Hecham ben Abd
el-Melek, said: "I have not seen in this country any share for Qeïs, except however for the people of
Gadelat, who are of the tribe of Fahm and of 'Adouan." And he wrote: "The Commander of the Faithful --
may God prolong his days -- has illustrated and glorified the tribe of Qeïs and raised its renown.
However, I have come to Egypt and have not found that it had any share there, with the exception of the
families of Fahm. There are however here regions where there is no one, and to whose inhabitants the
introduction of Qeïssites could neither cause harm nor bring an increase in the taxes -- I mean Belbeïs,
and if the Commander of the Faithful is of the opinion that the tribe of Qeïs settle there, it will do
so." Hecham answered: "Do what you will." Obeïd Allah sent a messenger to the desert and brought back a
hundred families of the Beni Nadr and a hundred families of the Beni Selim; the vali established them at
Belbeïs, gave them lands to cultivate, then, having examined the revenue of the tithe, abandoned it to
them. The newcomers bought

[PDF p. 263]

camels and undertook the transport of provisions to Qolzoum; each man earned per month ten dinars and
more. Obeïd Allah then had them buy horses; they procured colts that they kept only a month before
riding them, and they fed camels and horses without great difficulty, so fertile were their meadows. The
rest of the tribe, having learned the prosperous state of its brothers, the greater part wished to join
them, and five hundred new families came in their turn to settle in Egypt and gave themselves over to
the same occupations as the others. At the end of a year, five hundred other families having come, there
were at Belbeïs one thousand five hundred families of Qeïs, so much so that in the time of Merwan ben
Mohammed, El-Housra ben Souhaid El-Baheli being governor of Egypt, Qeïs declared for him. At the death of
Merwan, there were in Egypt three thousand families of Qeïs that did not cease to multiply and increase
by all those who came to them from the desert.

In the year 178 [7 April 794 to 26 March 795], Ishaq ben Soliman Ali ben Abd Allah ben Abbas, emir of
Egypt, after examination of the finances, struck the cultivators with an increase of tax they could not
bear. The people of the Houf took up arms against him and assembled in troops; the army of the emir sent
against them was repulsed and lost a great number of men. Ishaq then wrote to the Commander of the
Faithful Haroun el-Rashid to inform him of what was happening. The latter sent into Egypt Hartama ben
A'eïn with a considerable army. Hartama arrived in the Houf, whose inhabitants hastened to meet him,
protesting their obedience and consenting to pay the tax. Hartama consented to it and collected the
totality of the tax.

Later, the people of the Houf rose against El-Leitz ben El-Fadel el-Bioudi, emir of Egypt, because the
surveyors sent by the emir to measure the extent of the cultivated lands had diminished the qasaba by a
few fingers. They addressed a complaint to El-Leitz, who took no account of it. They organized themselves
in troops and marched on Fostat; El-Leitz went to meet them with four thousand men of the army of Egypt,
in the month of Shaban of the year 186 [5 August to 2 September 802]; he joined the rebel troops in the
month of Ramadan [3 September to 2 October 802], but on the 12th of the month [14 September 802] the army
abandoned

[PDF p. 264]

him, and there remained to him hardly more than two hundred men with whom he marched against the people
of the Houf, whom he beat and put to rout, and he arrived at the same time as they at Rheifat; the two
armies came to blows on the territory of Geb-Amirat, and El-Leitz sent to Fostat eighty heads of
Qeïssite chiefs, after which he returned to Fostat, and the people of the Houf returned home, but again
refused to pay the tax. In consequence, El-Leitz went to the Commander of the Faithful, Haroun el-Rachid,
in the month of Moharrem of the year 187 [30 December 802 to 28 January 803], and asked him to entrust to
him an army because, he said, without an army it was impossible for him to make the people of the Houf
pay the tax. Mahfouz ben Salim, who stood at the door of El-Rachid, engaged himself toward him to bring
in the tax to the last qirat, without whip or stick. El-Rachid named him on the spot intendant of the
finances of Egypt, and El-Leitz ben Fadel was deposed from the charges he occupied in Egypt.

Under the valiyat of El-Hossein ben Gamil, the people of the Houf again refused to pay the tax, and the
Commander of the Faithful, Haroun el-Rachid, sent to bring them to reason Yahia ben Moaz. The latter
arrived at Belbeïs in the month of Shawal of the year 191 [10 August to 7 September 807], deposed
El-Hossein ben Gamil from the emirate of Egypt in the month of Rabi' el-Akher of the year 193 [22 January
to 19 February 809], and installed as vali Malek ben Dalham. Yahia ben Moaz brought the Houf back into
duty and arrived at Fostat in the month of Gamadi el-Akher [22 March to 19 April 809]. There he received
a letter from El-Rachid recalling him to him. He therefore wrote to the people of the Houf a note
conceived thus: "Come, that I may recommend you to Malik ben Delham and arrange between you and him the
affair of your taxes." All the chiefs of the Houf, originally from Yemen and from Qeïssiat, answered his
call, but Yahia, who had had chains prepared, ordered the gates closed; the chains were brought, and the
chiefs were chained, whom Yahia took away with him; this took place toward the middle of the month of
Rageb of the same year (193) [20 April to 19 May 809].

When 'Eïsi ben Yezid El-Galoudi was emir of Egypt, Salah ben Sheirzad, intendant of the treasury, showed
himself unjust toward the population and increased the [...]

[PDF p. 265]

taxes. The people of the Delta revolted and took up arms. 'Eïsi sent to fight them an army commanded by
his own son Mohammed. The latter arrived at Belbeïs and engaged in combat, but he had great difficulty
escaping the slaughter, from which none of his companions returned. This happened in the month of Safer
of the year 214 [10 April to 8 May 829]. 'Eïsi was deposed and replaced by Oumaïr ben El-Oualid
el-Tamimi, who prepared to fight the people of the Houf and set out with his army in the month of Rabi'
el-Akher [8 June to 6 July 829]. The people of the Houf marched to meet him, combat was engaged, and a
great number of rebels were killed; the rest took flight, pursued by Oumaïr and a handful of his
companions. But Oumaïr, having fallen into an ambush, was killed by the rebels on the 16th of Rabi'
el-Akher [23 June 829]. 'Eïsi el-Galoudi, named vali for the second time, marched against the
insurgents; a combat was engaged whose result was that 'Eïsi, in rout, regained Fostat, burning the
baggage and all that could hinder his march. He entrenched himself in Fostat, which he surrounded with a
ditch. It was the month of Rageb [4 September to 3 October 829]. Abou Ishaq ben El-Rachid then arrived
from Iraq, entered the Houf, and sent messengers to the inhabitants, who refused obedience. Abou Ishaq
fought them in the month of Shaban [4 October to 1 November 829] and, after having seized a great number
of their chiefs, entered Fostat in the month of Shawal [2 to 30 December 829]. Then he set out again for
Iraq in the month of Moharrem of the year 215 [28 February to 29 March 830], taking with him all these
prisoners.

In the month of Gamadi el-Awal of the year 216 [16 June to 15 July 831], all of Lower Egypt, Arabs and
Copts, revolted, chased out the governor, and refused obedience, exasperated by the wickedness the
lieutenants of the sultan showed toward them. There were between them and the army of Fostat struggles
that prolonged themselves until the arrival in Egypt of the caliph, servant of God, Commander of the
Faithful, Al-Mamoun, on the 10th of the month of Moharrem 217 [16 February 832]. Discontented with 'Eïsi
ben Mansour El-Rafeqi, emir of Egypt, the caliph ordered his pavilion detached, made him, by punishment,
put on white garments, and said: "This frightful event is only the consequence of your acts and those of
your lieutenants. You have overwhelmed the people with burdens too heavy for them, and you have kept the
events hidden from us until the circumstances had become grave and the country was in revolt." Then,
having levied an army, he sent it into the Said; for himself, he transported himself to Sakha and sent
El-Afshin against the Copts who had refused obedience. El-Afshin met them near Yashroud and kept them
surrounded until they had returned to the obedience due to the Commander of the Faithful. The latter
decided that the men would be put to death and that the women and children would be sold, and, indeed,
the greater part of the Houf was devastated. El-Mamoun pursued all those who only seemed to disobey him,
and he had a great number of people killed. Returned to Fostat in the month of Safer [8 March to 7 April
832], he went to Helouan, then returned on the 18th of Safer [25 March 832]. His stay at Fostat, Sakha,
and Helouan was forty-nine days. In the time of El-Mamoun, the revenues of Egypt, collected with the
strictest equity, reached 4,257,000 dinars.

It is recounted that, during the visit El-Mamoun made to the villages of Egypt, there was prepared for
him, at each halt, an esplanade on which his tent was pitched and which his soldiers surrounded. He
stayed in each village a day and a night. Now, passing in the vicinity of a small town named Ta-el-Naml,
he did not stop there, for it was a wretched village; he had already passed it when an old woman, named
Maria the Copt, proprietor of the place, approached him crying. The emir, believing she came to complain
of some injustice, suspended his march, and as he never traveled without interpreters of all sorts of
languages, these questioned the woman and came to translate her words to El-Mamoun: "O Commander of the
Faithful," she said, "you have stayed in all the villages and you have crossed mine without stopping
there; the Copts will mock me. I ask the Commander of the Faithful that he do me the favor of stopping
in my village, it will be an honor for me and my descendants, and thus he will not give arms against me
to my enemies." And the old woman wept so abundantly that El-Mamoun had pity on her, turned the bridle
of his mount, and made halt. The son of the old woman then came to inquire of the chief of the cooks
what he needed of sheep,

[PDF p. 266 — note: text from p.267]

chickens, hens, fish, spices, honey-sugar, perfumes, wax, fruits, fodder, and other provisions he
habitually needed. And the indicated quantity was brought, and even more. The emir was accompanied by
his brother El-Mo'tasem El-Abbas, by his nephews El-Ouatheq and El-Moutawaqel, by Yahia ben Aktam, and
the cadi Ahmed ben Daoud. To each of them the old woman presented a special service, so much so that
none of them nor any of the chiefs of the escort had need of his neighbor. As for El-Mamoun, the feast
she served him was so beautiful, so exquisite, and so abundant that he was marveled at it. The next
morning, at the moment of departure, the old woman presented herself before the caliph, accompanied by
ten young girls each carrying a tray. El-Mamoun, seeing her come from afar, said to those around him:
"Here is the Copt who brings you her rustic gift -- preserves in vinegar, fish, or myrrh." But when she
was nearer him, he saw that each tray contained a purse of gold. The caliph, quite astonished, ordered
her to take back these purses. "No, by God!" said the old woman, "I will do nothing of the kind." The
caliph examined the pieces of gold, which were all struck with the same date, and he said: "This, by
God! is even more extraordinary. Our treasury itself would perhaps not be rich enough to present as
much." "Commander of the Faithful," said the old woman, "do not break our hearts and do not mock us." "A
part of what you have done suffices us," said the caliph; "we do not wish to be a charge on you, take
back your gold, and may the blessing of God be upon you!" The old woman then, seizing a handful of
earth, cried: "This (and she showed the gold) comes to us from that (and she showed the handful of earth
she had gathered) thanks to your justice, and I possess great quantities of it." The caliph then ordered
his companions to accept the gold she offered and gave the old woman in fief numerous villages and, from
the village of Ta-el-Naml that belonged to her, he exempted two hundred feddans from the tax. After
which, he withdrew, marveled at the liberality of the old woman and the extent of her riches.

[PDF p. 268]

CHAPTER XXXI
OF THE FARMING (LEASE) OF THE LANDS OF EGYPT, AFTER THE DIFFUSION OF ISLAM AMONG THE COPTS AND THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ARABS, AND OF WHAT BECAME OF IT UNTIL THE SECOND CADASTRE OF EL-NASER

After the Arabs had settled in the countryside of Egypt, had disseminated themselves there with their
families, and had laid hands on the cultivations to make of them an object of food or of trade; after
the generality of the Copts had, at least in appearance, embraced Islam, and their race had mixed with
that of the Arabs as a consequence of their marriage with Muslim women, the lands of Egypt were governed
by new institutions, among which we will recall the following:

The functionary in charge of the revenues of Egypt held his sessions in the mosque of Amr ben El-As, at
Fostat, at the period when the farming of the lands was settled. One came from the towns and the
villages to these sessions; and there a man cried for each village: "Sale! Sale!" The accountants of the
tax, who stood before the one in charge of the treasury, inscribed the sum to which the adjudication of
the village amounted and the name of the adjudicatees. This lease was made for four years, which allowed
account to be taken of the inundations, the droughts, etc. The adjudication finished, each of those who
had leased a terrain and answered for it went to this terrain and had henceforth the charge of
cultivating it, repairing the dikes that depended on it, and executing all the works its cultivation
required; he was responsible for the upkeep of his farm, and with him the members of his family and
those he had associated with himself for this purpose, under condition of paying the tax pertaining to
the leased terrain; this tax was paid by fractions at determined periods, and there was deducted from
the total of the rent and the security deposit paid the expenses effected for the repair of the dikes,
the closing of the water-intakes and the canals, all according to the estimate fixed by the divan of the
tax. The sum that, each year, remained to be paid by

[PDF p. 269]

the guarantors and the lessees was called the remainder (reliquat). The valis charged with the recovery
of these sums were sometimes very hard, sometimes also very indulgent. Every thirty years, at the end of
the year, the whole country was cadastred anew and a new distribution of the tax was made, increasing
the lands that could bear the increase, without taking account of the price of the lease, and
diminishing what should be diminished. These adjudications were always made in the mosque of Amr ben
El-As until Ahmed ben Touloun had built his mosque. El-'Asker having become the residence of the emir of
Egypt, the divan was transferred to the mosque of Ahmed ben Touloun. In the time of El-Aziz billah Nazar,
the divan was installed in the dwelling of the vizier Ya'qoub ben Koullous, and at the death of this
vizier, in the palace of Cairo, where it remained during the domination of the Fatimids. After the fall
of the Fatimids, the divan was withdrawn from the palace of Cairo, and I will, on this subject, give the
most satisfying details.

Ibn Zoulaq, in the book entitled Accounts of the Mardaniin (the Mardaniin were the writers of Egypt),
says: Abou-l-Hassan Ouahb ben Ismaïl was attending one day the council of Abou Bekr ben Ali El-Mardani in
the mosque El-Gama'; the villages were being put up for auction. Abou Bekr said to him: "Presently an
adjudication is going to be proceeded with. Let us associate to obtain it." The adjudication being
proclaimed, Abou Bekr said: "Inscribe it in the name of Abou-l-Hassan." It was therefore inscribed thus;
Abou-l-Hassan was declared adjudicatee and immediately gained 40,000 dinars, of which he received for his
own account 20,000. He did not know what to do with this sum, when one day, being in conversation with
Abou Ya'qoub, secretary of Abou Bekr, the latter said to him: "I saw the vizier today (he was speaking of
Abou Bekr El-Mardani); he was very preoccupied and was seeking to gather money without being able to
succeed." "I have at my house," answered Abou-l-Hassan, "nearly 20,000 dinars." "Bring them to me," said
Abou Ya'qoub. Abou-l-Hassan sent them to him and withdrew a receipt for the sum. Now, one day when
Abou-l-Hassan had returned to Abou Bakr el-Mardani, he said to him: "The adjudication has paid what I
owed and procured me a profit of 40,000 dinars; of this sum I had already received 20,000 dinars, I have
sent to collect the rest and will bring it." "What is this joke?" said El-Mardani. "I told you that we
would be associated together, because I distrusted your carelessness, but I fully intended to leave you
the money." And he gave Abou [...]

[PDF p. 270]

Ya'qoub the order to restore to Abou-l-Hassan the money the latter had paid, and he asked Abou-l-Hassan
to return the receipt he had taken from Abou Ya'qoub. Abou-l-Hassan therefore took back the money he had
given to Abou Ya'qoub.

In the year when the general Gouher came to Egypt, the tax rose to 3,400,000 and some dinars. In the
history of Mo'ezz lidin Allah Mo'add, it is said: On the 16th of Moharrem of the year 363 [17 October
973], El-Mo'ezz lidin Allah established at the head of the revenues, the collection, etc., Yaqoub ben
Kels and Asloug ben El-Hassan. Therefore, on the habitual day, these two personages sat in the hall of
the emir, in the mosque of Ibn Touloun, and proceeded to the adjudication of the villages and the other
means of procuring money; the people had come for the adjudication, and an effort was made to bring in
what was owed on the rents by the adjudicatees, the lessees, and their agents.

El-Hassan ben Ali El-Bazouri, the author of the history of the vizier El-Nas liddin, reports that this
vizier, wishing to know the sum of the receipts of the empire and those of the expenses, in order to
establish a balance between the two, ordered the chiefs of the divans each to establish the sum of the
receipts and expenses of his department. This was done and the statements were handed to the chief of
the divan of the council, who was the intendant of the divans; the latter made of all these statements an
overall report that he handed to the vizier. The latter ascertained that the receipts of the empire were
2,000,000 dinars, of which 1,000,000 for Syria; the statement carried opposite the statement of the
expenses of this province; Egypt and the rest of the empire produced equally 1,000,000 dinars. From this
total, it was necessary to withdraw for the uncultivated terrains or those unproductive of tax as a
consequence of the death, flight, or disappearance of their tenants, 200,000 dinars; there remained
therefore 800,000 dinars on which it was necessary to levy the appointments and costume-costs of the
collectors -- that is, 300,000 dinars; for the price of the grains necessary to the palaces, 100,000
dinars; for the expenses of the palace, 200,000 dinars; for repairs, costs of hospitality toward
travelers, kings, or private persons, 100,000 dinars. There remained therefore, all this paid, 100,000
net dinars that were sent each year to the treasury (of the caliph) and remained deposited there. This
work of the vizier rendered his person agreeable to the king, who showered him with his affection. After
the death of El-Bazouri, this total yield was 600,000 dinars, payable

[PDF p. 271]

in two terms, 300,000 dinars at the beginning of Rageb and 300,000 dinars at the beginning of Moharrem;
subsequently, the receipts fell while the expenses increased.

Ibn Misrat says: El-Afdal ben Émir el-Gouïouch had a statement drawn up of the receipts of Egypt; these
receipts amounted to 5,000,000 dinars in money and 1,000,000 ardebs in kind. The emir Gamal el-Moulk
Mousa ben El-Mamoun El-Bataïhi, in his history, speaking of the events of the year 501 [22 August 1107 to
10 August 1108], says: Then the general Abou Abd Allah Mohammed ben Fatek El-Bataïhi, seeing that the
wealth of the soldiers and the farmers was declining, that the latter complained of the diminution of
their harvest and the bad state into which this diminution plunged their affairs, while the domains of
the emirs had more than doubled their revenues -- revenues that went always increasing, contrary to
those of the others -- seeing moreover that everywhere arrears were owed to the divan, arrears whose
totality could not be recovered by the divan except by violence and by sending messenger upon messenger
on the part of the noble divan, he proposed to El-Afdal ben Émir el-Gouïouch to rescind the lease of all
the domains and reestablish them anew, demonstrating to him that in this the divan and the farmers had an
equal interest, for by this means the divan would recover the arrears in suffering and could put back
into condition a number of abandoned villages. El-Afdal having consented to it, the lease contracts of
all the domains were rescinded, and a new cadastre was established. The great ones and the lords
protested and complained, saying that they possessed only gardens, personal properties, and presses. The
vizier declared to them that those who possessed personal properties would keep them, that these
properties would not be comprised in the résiliations, and that every proprietor would be free to sell or
rent his good. The résiliation being made, the vizier engaged the poor people of the army to push the
bids, so that the increase fell on the terrains of the great lords and reached a sum fixed in advance.
Then it was established on the registers that the terrain remained in the hands of its proprietor and
that for thirty years it would undergo no increase. Then, having summoned the great ones, El-Afdal said
to them: "What displeases you in the terrains that were in the hands of the soldiers?" "It is," they said,
"that their price is too high and their revenue insignificant; they are relatively

[PDF p. 272]

sterile and one meets there very few inhabitants." "Give," he answered, "for each terrain the price it
seems to you to be worth; apply yourselves to acquiring it and do not occupy yourselves with the former
state of things." Then the hostility of the great ones was appeased, and they pushed the bids until each
of them had reached the sum he desired to pay. At this price the lease was consented and inscribed on the
registers with the stipulated conventions. The two parties found their advantage in it, and the divan
gained by it lands formerly distributed in the fiefs and of a value of 50,000 dinars.

In the account of the events of the year 515 [26 May 1116 to 4 May 1117], the same author says: The
venerable El-Mamoun had the accounts of the empire, until then established according to the lunar years,
drawn up, and prescribed transforming them into accounts of budgetary years and disposing the whole into
two sums, one going up to the lunar year 510 [22 March 1121 to 11 March 1122], with the corresponding
budgetary year, and the other up to the end of the year 515 and the corresponding budgetary year. This
statement drawn up, one found oneself in the presence of a considerable sum of arrears in gold and in
kind; opposite each sum were inscribed the name and the country of the debtor. This statement finished,
El-Mamoun published a rescript remitting all the debts up to the end of the year 510, of which here is the
copy: "Informed of the wretched state of the workers, the farmers, and the lessees, as well as of the
sums they remain owing on their taxes, we condescend that the sums inscribed as arrears in the registers
be remitted, desiring to deliver the lessees -- long asleep and whose conscience is annihilated -- from
the continual reclamations with which the ministry harasses them through the intermediary of its agents,
and wishing that they resume for cultivation the ardor they showed formerly. And as this remission is an
excellent act that has never been done by any king and that no prince does currently, I have wished that
this document be drawn up and that this rescript be joined to it, for I have seen the painful situation
of the lessees and the workers of the kingdom whom adversity pursues; I see also that the arrears of
money accumulate, and this is why, filled for them with clemency and mercy, and having in our noble and
prophetic dignity taken cognizance of all this in detail and as a whole, we have published this rescript

[PDF p. 273]

so that all may be put back into condition; and we have had a great number of copies made, intended to
spread this act of goodness and propagate it through all the countries where it will be read publicly in
all the squares." The sum of the arrears thus remitted amounted, at the moment of the signing of the
decree, to 2,720,767 dinars 20 qirats and 11/12 of a qirat, in gold; to 4 dirhems of pure silver, 67,005
dirhems 16 qirats of minted silver; 3,810,239 ardebs 5 qirats and 2/3 of a qirat of grains, 1/4 of an
ardeb of jujubes, 2,403 and 1/2 ardebs of sabagh leaves, 10 and 1/4 ardebs of myrtle seeds, 1,480
qantars 1 and 1/2 rotoli of sabagh, 913 and 1/2 qantars of alum, 531 rotolis of iron, 1,303 rotolis 18
qirats of pitch, 19 and 1/3 rotolis of cedar resin, 3 garments of Aleppo, 100 cloaks of wool, 170 sieves,
235,305 sheep, 313 qantars and 382 rotolis of green dates, 375,550 fathoms of white cloth, 438,753 palm
branches, 1,423 well-ropes, 1,703 horses, 2,793 and 1/3 ardebs of salt, 11 ardebs of alkali, 2,000
pomegranates, 541 qantars 1/6 of bee-honey, 32 jars and 1 qadous of dry honey, 440 rotolis of wax, 3,042
hives, 138 qantars of cane molasses, 22,164 oxen, 74 mounts, 2,996 matr 7 qirats of melted butter, 820
rotolis of cheese, 4,123 fleeces of wool, 6,050 and 1/4 rotolis of (goat or camel) hair; 2 tents of
(camel) hair; and all these dues were inscribed with the name and the country of the debtor.

When the decision of the divan relative to the outbidding and the résiliation of the leases in course was
handed to El-Mamoun (a decision that withdrew the lands from the hands of those who had received them and
who conformed, at the price of the most painful fatigues, to the adopted conventions, to make them pass
into the hands of those who offered an outbid without any trouble or fatigue), El-Mamoun opposed this
decision and prevented the résiliation of the lands, not wishing to commit so bad an action; he had an
order drawn up in which he took the defense of the farmers and the workers against the outbidding
decision proposed regarding the lands they occupied, and of which, according to him, they should remain
the masters as long as they faithfully executed their contracts and paid their installments; he therefore
drew up a rescript that was read in the mosque of El-Azhar at Cairo and in the old mosque of Masr, as
well as in the divan of the council and the particular divan, which then formed the superior councils;
here is the faithful copy of it: "We have been informed of the way in which act the numerous employees
and administrators of the divans who, after having given in lease to people of good faith and faithful
executors of engagements -- posts, cities, gardens, baths, magazines, or houses, etc. -- hasten to
withdraw them from them as soon as an outbidder presents himself; so that the latter is put in possession
of the leased thing, from which the original lessee is expelled, in contempt of all justice, without
taking account of the contract passed with him and without considering that he is despoiled -- a thing
forbidden by religion and illegal.

[PDF p. 274]

We have held the conduct of these employees to be bad and have blamed their way of acting, for they
depart from the truth and stray from the right path. We have submitted the case to the holy and pure
Threshold (may God multiply its lights and ever raise its insignia!), asking for sublime orders that
would permit us to dispatch this rescript to all the provinces, namely: Whoever has contracted a lease
of a post, city, garden, domain, or village and pays the installments of his lease, respecting the
clauses of his contract in all justice, let his lease be maintained and, during all the duration of his
lease, let no outbid be accepted! To act thus is to conform to justice and sublime equity, and to follow
the orders given by God himself, who in his sacred book says (and it is the most glorious of all those
who speak): 'O you who believe, be faithful to your engagements' (Koran, V, 1). Their lease will
therefore be maintained until the duration stipulated in the contract has elapsed, the contract has
reached its term, and its clauses and conditions are extinguished, according to the customs in force and
the prescriptions of the religion that renders venerable the one who does not stray from its precepts and
its laws. As for the lessees who do not fulfill their obligations and attempt to evade the conditions and
clauses of their contract, using cunning and deceit -- which is the property of a perverse mind -- those
have themselves broken their contract by the non-execution of the stipulated clauses and will be
considered as if, at the moment of the bidding, some other had outbid them; their contract will be
annulled, the terrains will be withdrawn from them, for it is they who will have first broken the
contract and opened a way against themselves. Let it therefore be prescribed to all the chiefs of the
divans, to all the administrators, to all the employees to conform to the orders given in this rescript,
to obey them, to act toward the lessees and the workers according to what is [...]

[PDF p. 275]

contained, and to take care not to infringe it; for it has been registered at the divan of the council
and at the private divan -- august councils -- in the register where similar acts are registered, when
it pleases God!"

The same El-Mamoun received from the valis, inspectors, and verifiers charged with controlling and
surveying the lands and the saqiehs (waterwheels) a report containing the result of the inspection and
the measure of the terrains occupied by the proprietors of saqiehs. These saqiehs were very numerous,
and on one of them, situated on the territory of Esneh, depended a terrain of a surface of three hundred
sixty feddans, covered with palms, vines, and sugarcane, which paid only ten dinars of tax per year;
many similar facts occurred in the provinces. The inspectors had, in the name of the divan, put the
seizure on all these lands and asked the holders for their proof of possession; but the latter declared
that they held them from their fathers and had no other titles. The inspectors therefore sent under
escort the proprietors to the Porte, so that a decision be made about them: "On their arrival," they
wrote, "hold them under good guard until they have paid what they owe of tax for these saqiehs, for it
happens too often that the proprietors do not pay what they owe." These people were therefore brought
before El-Mamoun on the day he sat to render justice. El-Mamoun had them come into his presence and
designated, to decide about them, the cadi Gelal el-Moulk Abou-l-Haggaz Youssef ben Abou Ayoub
El-Magrebi, who was then cadi of cadis. The latter, after having subjected them to an interrogation,
estimated that they were in the wrong and condemned them to pay a sum capable of absorbing their fortune
and their properties. But they pushed such complaints that they were pitied and a more just decision was
taken regarding them: they were condemned to pay the tax in the future and to leave aside what they owed
until then. On this occasion a rescript was drawn up, of which here is the tenor: "Everyone knows how
magnanimous and just the caliph is toward his subjects, how generous and attentive to the well-being of
those who are far as of those who are near him. We never learn that a harm reaches one of our subjects
without our making it cease, and we know no improvement that may be useful to him without our putting it
into effect, conforming in this to the duties of the shepherds of peoples and to our obligations toward
those who are far from us or who are

[PDF p. 276]

near our person, and following in this way the path traced by the Fatimid dynasty (may God strengthen its
empire and render it durable!) and continuing its generous decisions. Persuaded that it is our duty to
concern ourselves with the well-being of our subjects, and that to arrive at it an energetic firmness and
a wise decision are needed, we have wished to examine the affairs of the divans and make the latter
execute their duty, which is to protect the honor of religion, to make war on the infidels and the
impious, so that all our decisions, all our views, conform to what justice requires and are exempt from
all evil, with the permission of God. And we ask his aid that he grant us his support to execute what he
permits and forbid what he interdicts. We pray him to guide us in the best and most equitable path. On
him we lean, he suffices us, and what a good guide!"

The cadi El-Rachid ben El-Zobeïr, being governor of the Upper Said, addressed to the council of El-Afdal a
report on the situation of the tenants of the domains of the region, in which it was said that these
tenants had joined to their domains other terrains belonging to the divan; these terrains over which they
had extended were neighboring their properties and they had unduly installed themselves on them. The cadi
therefore drew up a table intended for the divan, and this table clearly brought out these usurpations;
all the necessary explanations were joined to it. El-Rachid asked that these lands revert to the divan and
begged the latter to decide on this subject according to the laws in use in each region and each locality.
At the end of the report he said: "I have sent into the jurisdiction of my government several inspectors
charged with verifying the situation and addressing me a faithful report. My orders have been executed
relative to the domains of which I speak to you, and I have received from the inspectors a report in which
they declare having asked the tenants of domains and saqiehs for the authentic proof of their possession,
with the enumeration of the quantity of feddans these terrains occupy and the mention of their limits;
but none was able to produce a writing or furnish explanations. In consequence, the inspectors have sent
to the divan the detail of the frauds discovered and have ascertained the flagrant usurpation and the
manifest iniquity of the occupation of these lands. The holy law required that one practice the seizure
of the terrains thus usurped and that one reclaim from the proprietors the revenues and the harvests owed
since their fraudulent installation,

[PDF p. 277]

since they had in their hands no paper establishing their right of occupation and they relied on no title
of property -- a title that by prudence they should have kept to avoid all discussion on the authenticity
of their possession; but, always guided by what we believe to be useful to the inhabitants and by the
justice whose insignia we raise high and whose traces and vestiges we restore, drawn by the desire to
restore to the country its prosperity, by rendering its situation happy and extending the cultivation of
the terrains left unproductive by the installation of the plantations and the putting into condition of
the saqiehs, we have had this rescript drawn up, which will be read in the provinces of the Upper Said,
so that all the domains, lands, and saqiehs be left in the hands of those who currently hold them,
without anything being able to be taken back or withdrawn from them, on the condition that they will be,
for the future, struck with the tax it is just to establish. I desire that the divan approve this
gracious abandonment toward the tenants; this generosity, we reclaim it with insistence and we will not
cease to ask this favor. What is past, we have pardoned and set aside, but we have forbidden beginning
again in the future; thus we have shown ourselves good toward those who have passed from the bad to the
good path, and in this we have conformed to our habits of pardon and benevolence, presenting this
transaction as a penance offered to all the guilty. As for the one among them who begins again, may God
take vengeance on him! He will be reclaimed at once the present debts and the past debts, and our
conscience will have no remorse in taking their wealth and their soul; their fine and their punishment
will be doubled, and they will see the door of mercy and salvation closed to them. For those who desire
to sow the sterile lands producing only alfa, and to put back into condition the abandoned and unused
cultivations, we have permitted that they be abandoned to them after having taken the measure of them,
and decided that tax would be levied on them only four years after their taking possession of these
terrains, each feddan being imposed according to its kind of cultivation per the tariff in force and the
customs in use. The order to execute this rescript is given to the lieutenants, to the governors of
districts, and to all those who habitually receive communication of the decisions of the council; let
them make appear all the

[PDF p. 278]

tenants of domains and saqiehs and inform them of this act of benevolence that surpasses what they could
have hoped and on which they could have counted; let the tax be established on these tenants as we have
prescribed above; the divan, I hope, will ratify this transaction and give in farm the uncultivated
lands and the unused fields to those who desire to rent them; let the necessary titles be drawn up for
this and addressed to the divan to be there, like the other titles, preserved in perpetuity. I have the
hope that this rescript will be copied into the register intended for the registration of similar acts."
And these improvements having been spread into all the provinces, one applied oneself to bringing in the
tax and putting the country under cultivation.

Under the government of the Fatimids, no more than before them during the administration of the emirs,
there were in Egypt no fiefs for the army, as is established today for the army of the Turkish government.
The country, divided into parcels, was leased to those who desired it -- emirs, soldiers, nobles,
peasants, Arabs, Copts, or others. There was not known then this kind of farming called felahat
(agriculture) whose workers attached to the land are named pure fallahs and are in the position of
slaves, sons of slaves, with respect to the one to whom the domain is conceded -- with this exception,
however, that he can be neither sold nor freed and that he is, he and his children, a slave during all
his life. Therefore those who chose lands received them on the conditions we have set forth above, and
the taxes on them were paid into the treasury. As soon as the money of the tax had reached the divan, it
was employed to pay the regiments of soldiers at the expense of the Treasury. Here is how one proceeded:
as soon as the Nile had withdrawn and the countryside of Egypt had covered itself with all sorts of
cultivations, some intelligent man of the court was designated, to whom were joined some persons known
for their equity, their good faith, and their science of the tax -- most of whom were Coptic Christians;
this commission went into each of the districts of which we have spoken, took there the measure of the
cultivated lands and the terrains left uncultivated for lack of irrigation; a list was drawn up
presenting the number of feddans, the designation of the parcels, and the kind of cultivation, and the
whole was reported to the divan of the Porte. And, after having let four months of the Coptic year pass,
officers of notorious energy and unshakeable resolution were chosen, to whom were given as auxiliaries
employees of integrity and

[PDF p. 279]

of incontestable fidelity, and a Coptic Christian writer chosen from among those who had not taken part
in the survey. And in their turn they went into all the districts and brought in a third of the tax
established according to the tables annexed to the lists. This third once collected, one proceeded to
the pay of the army, and one acted likewise at each installment during the whole course of the year; but
always some sum remained unpaid by the lessees and the farmers and formed the remainder of the tax. The
lands of Egypt then paid the tax in money, in grains, and in all sorts of products; this is rendered
manifest by the act of remission of the arrears drawn up under the caliphate of El-Amr bihakem Allah by
the vizier El-Mamoun El-Bataïhi. I have read in an opuscule of El-As'ad ben Mohazzab ben Zakaria ben
Mamati, the Egyptian writer, the following passage: "I asked one day the cadi El-Fadl Abd el-Rahim how
many was the figure of the soldiers inscribed at the divan when our master was in charge of it in the
time of Rozaïq ben El-Saleh, and he answered me: 'Forty thousand cavalry and thirty and some thousand
negro infantry.'" Abou Amr Othman El-Naboulsi, in his book entitled Beauty of the Events of the Taking
of the Castle of the Island, says: Dargham having revolted against Shaour, the latter, frightened, fled
to the sultan Nour el-Din Mahmoud ben Zengi at Damascus and asked him for help against Dargham, promising
to be in the future his lieutenant in Egypt and to remit to him the tribute, thus giving birth in the
mind of Nour el-Din to thoughts he had not yet had. The latter therefore had a corps of a thousand
cavalry prepared and put at their head Asd el-Din Sheirkaouah, to whom he gave the order to march with
Shaour. Sheirkaouah refused: "I will not go," he said, "for my loss and that of my companions would be
certain, and it is known here how perverse is the counsel the sultan has listened to. How could I march
with a thousand cavalry against a country defended by ten thousand cavalry, a hundred saphabed
(regiments) of ten thousand combatants, and forty thousand negroes, without counting the natives who
will rise to defend their homeland? I know their manner of fighting, and we could not, fatigued by the
journey, oppose to them so small a number of men." Despite this, he ended by accepting! And this -- may
God be agreeable to you! -- happened at the time when the army of Ahmed ben Touloun was composed as you
will see, God willing, in the chapter of the Fiefs.

As for the army of the emir Abou Bekr Mohammed ben Tofaz El-Akhshidi, [...]

[PDF p. 280]

many people have spoken of it, among others Ibn Khallican, who evaluates it at four hundred thousand
men. And, at the fall of the Fatimid dynasty, at the time of the invasion of the Ghozz arriving from
Syria, and the taking of possession of the government of Egypt by Salah el-Din Youssef ben Ayoub, the
situation of the army underwent some modifications, but not a complete change.

The cadi El-Fadl, in his Chronicles of the year 567 [4 September 1171 to 22 August 1172], says: On the
8th of Moharrem [11 September 1171], Salah el-Din gave the order to mount on horseback the old and the
new army; this took place when everyone had been forewarned -- as much those who were near the capital
as those who were far from it -- when all had arrived and the arms and mounts of each had been put in
condition. And that day, there was such a gathering of troops that, in the opinion of all the old men
and all the competent people, never had any prince of Islam assembled such an army; the ambassadors of
the Greeks and the Franks were present, and these infidels were struck (by such power). The parade of the
army, regiment after regiment, talab after talab (the talab in the Ghez language is the title given to
the commanding emir who possesses a special banner, a trumpet at his orders, and a number of cavalry
varying from 200 or 100 to 70), was still going on when the day ceased and night began to spread; the
order was then given to bring the troops back in, and the parade was not finished. The number of men
present constituted 147 talabs; the absent, 20 other talabs; the evaluation of this ensemble exceeds
14,000 cavalry, most of whom were touachis (the touachi is a personage who receives a salary varying from
700 to 1,000 and even 1,200 dinars; he has a troop of 10 head or more of horses, mules, or camels, and a
squire to carry his arms; his service is completed by a qara ghalamia, a troop of adolescents). In this
number are comprised the Bedouin servants whose total is 7,000 cavalry. They were reduced later to 1,300,
no more, receiving the tenth of the pay that was originally 1,000,000 dinars; it was at least what was
inscribed, but this sum was not effectively paid; thus the tribe of Taghalba, having been designated for
this service, showed itself very discontented and threatened to pass to the Franks.

[PDF p. 281]

In his Chronicle of the year 577 [17 May 1181 to 6 May 1182], the same author says: The sultan examined
attentively the affair of the fiefs that year, and, having learned their extent, he diminished some and
increased others, giving something to those who had nothing and increasing the domains of the personages
in favor, so that the number of people holding fiefs rose to 8,740 cavalry, 111 emirs, 6,976 touachis,
and 1,553 qara ghalamia, and there was attributed to them on the Treasury 3,670,500 dinars; in this
figure do not appear the retirees of the army who received as pension the tenth of the pay, nor the
Bedouins to whom were attributed the Sharqieh and the Behera, nor the Egyptian writers, nor the
jurisconsults, nor the cadis, nor the sufis, nor the ordinary employees of the divan, who all together
received at least 1,000,000 dinars.

In the Chronicle of the year 585 [19 February 1189 to 7 February 1190], by the same author, it is said:
Order was given to make the survey of the lands from Alexandria to Eizab; this work, which was to be
finished on the 24th of Shaban 585 [7 October 1189], did not comprise the frontier towns, nor the
terrains assigned by the divan to certain tax regimes, nor the terrains of heqr (emphyteutic leases), nor
the mortmain properties, nor Manfalout, nor Manqabat, nor many other localities whose names are mentioned
in the cited work and whose measures are not given. The surveyed terrains produced 4,653,019 net dinars,
deduction made of the expenses effected in the divan of El-Afdal El-Saïd and others; of this sum, the
revenues of the Sharqieh, the Martahieh, the Daqhalieh, Bouch, and other places counted for 1,170,923
dinars, of which here is the detail: divan of El-Adel, 728,248 dinars; fiefs of the emirs and the army,
including the remainder of their taxes in the aforesaid provinces, 158,203 dinars; divans of the blessed
wall (Cairo) and of El-Ashraf, 13,804 dinars; for the Bedouins, 234,296 dinars; for the Kenanites,
25,412 dinars; for the cadis and the sheikhs, 7,403 dinars; for the Qimarites, the Salehites, and the
Egyptian army, 12,504 dinars; for the people of Gaza and Ascalon quartered at Damietta, Tanis, and other
towns, 10,725 dinars; the rest, that is 3,462,074 dinars, was distributed thus: northern region:
1,151,653 dinars, of which here is the detail: suburb of the port of Alexandria, 8,138 dinars;

[PDF p. 282]

port of Rosetta, 2,000 dinars; the Behera, 115,576 dinars; the Houf Ramsis, 92,403 dinars; the two
Mezahmiat, 15,305 dinars; the island of Beni Naser, 112,646 dinars; the island of Qousseina, 130,592
dinars; the Gharbieh, 74,605 dinars; the Samanoudieh, 245,419 dinars; the Dengaouieh, 46,264 dinars; the
Menoufieh, 148,347 dinars; for the southern region, 1,610,441 dinars, distributed thus: Ghizeh, 153,204
dinars; the Atfieh, 59,728 dinars; the Bousirieh, 60,466 dinars; the Fayoum, 152,734 dinars; the
Behnesaieh, 352,634 dinars; the interior Oasis, the two exterior Oases, and the oasis of Behnesa, 25,000
dinars; Ashmouneïn, 147,732 dinars; the Sioutieh, not including Manfalout and Manqabat, 72,504 dinars;
the Akhmimich, 108,812 dinars; the province of Qous, 362,500 dinars; the frontier nome of Assouan, 25,000
dinars; the frontier district of Eïzab belongs to another divan.

In the Chronicle of the year 588 [18 January 1192 to 6 January 1193], the author says: The sum collected
by the divan of the sultan amounted, that year, to 354,044 dinars, while the receipt for the year 587 [29
January 1191 to 17 January 1192] had been superior to that of 586 [8 February 1190 to 28 January 1191] by
22,445 dinars, and moreover the arrears of that year rose to 31,622 dinars, which makes in money received
at the particular divan of El-Naser, for the year 587, 354,454 dinars and 23 qirats. [Footnote: At the
end of this chapter, the numbers given by Maqrizi have been much corrupted, and there is no longer any
concordance between the figures of the totals and those of the detail.]

[PDF p. 283]

CHAPTER XXXII
OF THE LAST CADASTRE, OF EL-NASER

Each warrior, besides the servant he possessed, received a special salary varying from 20 to 30,000
dirhems; some of them received 15,000 dirhems, and the lowest salary was still 10,000 dirhems,
independently of the inn-right that could reach up to 5,000 dirhems for the best-paid personages. Each
soldier could go to the inn with a certain number of horses; a chief of troop was considered as emir of
ten, and when he lodged somewhere, his troop lodged there with him; most of his companions ate at his
table, and an emir could eat only in the company of his troop. The pages of his army went each day to
fetch the dishes from his kitchen; and if the emir saw some other fire and, after inquiry, had learned
that someone of his troop desired to eat something special, he showed himself very discontented with
whoever disdained to eat as he did. But, despite all, their cooking was detestable and their garments
very badly made. El-Mamoun Lazeïn, having become sultan, proceeded to the survey of the lands; Egypt was
then divided into twenty-four qirats, of which four belonged in property to the sultan, ten to the army,
and ten to the emirs; but the emirs monopolized the greater part of the terrains reverting to the army,
and the latter could draw no revenue from them, these terrains being inscribed at the divan as domains of
emirs; these circumstances favored brigandage, and seditions and revolts were fomented, so much so that
one refused to pay one's debts or the taxes owed to the divans; all these sums became the prey of the
henchmen of the emirs and their employees, to the great prejudice of the peasants of the region. The
sultan made this state of things cease, restored the lands to their proprietors, and withdrew them from
the divan of the emirs; the first terrain thus withdrawn was that of Seïf el-din Mankou Tamer, lieutenant
of the sultanate, who was stripped of all the lands he occupied and from which he drew per year a hundred
thousand ardebs of grain.

[PDF p. 284]

All the emirs, treated likewise, were held to restore all the terrains they had usurped; favoritism was
abolished, and the sultan attributed to the emirs and the army eleven qirats, of which nine destined for
the troops, among whom they were indeed distributed. Then the sultan published a decree establishing that
the emirs and the army would have to content themselves with ten qirats only, the remaining qirat being
distributed to whoever had cause to complain of the smallness of the revenues of his domain. As the
particular domain of the sultan, certain fertile provinces were reserved, and the lieutenant Mankou Tamer
was charged with the distribution of the titles of property for the service of the sultan. The heart of
the emirs was filled with discontent to such a point that they drew upon themselves the treatment that
El-Mansour and his lieutenant Mankou Tamer inflicted on them.

In the time of El-Naser, El-Naser Mohammed cadastred the country. The author of the Life of El-Naser
says: In the year 715, the sultan El-Naser Mohammed ben Qalaoun resolved to establish the cadastre of
Egypt, in order to make a multitude of taxes cease and to enrich the royal treasury with a great part of
the lands. Here is why: having made the reckoning of the rations served to the mamelukes and servants of
El-Melek El-Mouzaffar Rokn-el-din Beibars El-Gashankir and the emir Salar, as well as those attributed to
all the Bordjite mamelukes, he ascertained that the salaries were between 1,000 and 800 dinars; but, not
daring to touch the pay of the servants of the two personages in question, he held council with the cadi
Fakhr el-din Mohammed ben Fadl Allah, intendant of the army; it was decided that the cadastre of the
lands of Egypt would be established, that domains would be distributed according to the will of the
sultan, and that the royal titles would be drawn up for each domain. Fakhr el-din, intendant of the army,
was charged with this work, and he drew up acts bearing the surface area and the delimitation of the
domains; after which the sultan dispatched emissaries into each province. The emir Badr el-din Geïkalcheh
El-Baba received the order to go to the province of Gharbieh with the chamberlain Azei and the accountant
El-Makin ben Farouitah; the emir Az el-din Eïdmer El-Khatiri was sent into the district of Sharkieh with
the emir Atmesh El-Magdi and the accountant Emin el-daoulat ben Qarmout; the emir Belban El-Sarakhdi,
El-Qaligi, and Ibn Taranta El-Beïbars El-Gamdar were sent into the provinces of Menoufieh and Behera;
El-Belili and El-Mourtini, into the region of the south. Each of these emissaries was accompanied by
writers, inspectors,

[PDF p. 285]

and surveyors; all went into the provinces assigned to them. Each of them, on setting foot in his
province, summoned the sheikhs of the country, the witnesses, the sages, the cadi, and the registers that
were in the hands of the feudatories; he examined the state of the revenues, in gold, in grains, and in
all sorts of things, verified the surface of the lands in feddans, making the count of the cultivated
parts and the uncultivated parts, noting the light terrains and the resistant terrains, the nature of the
plantations, the quantity of submerged lands, the extent of the region, and its dues in grains, chickens,
sheep, bersim, kischk, cakes, and other objects forming part of the diffah (hospitality due). All this
once noted, one proceeded to the survey of the domain in the presence and under the signature of the
witnesses, the surveyors, and the cadi specially charged with this operation, and one inscribed the exact
content. Then one had the list (of the inhabitants) of the villages and the land register brought, and
one set apart the particular goods of the sultan, the domains of the emirs, the military fiefs, and the
alienated terrains; and each acted thus for the totality of his province. This work was finished in
seventy-five days; special statements were drawn up for each village of Egypt, statements giving the
situation of that village, its extent, its limits, what it possessed of cultivated terrains, and what it
rendered in gold or in kind. The sultan then summoned El-Fakhr, intendant of the army, the pious El-As'ad
ben Amin El-Melek, known under the name of Kateb (secretary) of Sarlagh, and all the inspectors of the
kingdom, and constrained them to draw up statements where would be inscribed as royal properties the
terrains he designated to them, as well as the domains of the emirs. To the yield of each village was
joined the amount of what the peasants owed the feudatories as diffah-right; and to the content of this
same village, what it paid in the way of taxes. And he established for the army titles of fiefs according
to this system, and at the same time were suppressed the right of transport of the grains, from the
province in question to the port of Cairo, and the right of octroi (entry-toll) with which these grains
were struck.

The sultan likewise abolished a great number of taxes, among others: the right of disembarkation of the
grains, the principal resource of the divan and which was employed for the salary of the emirs and the
army; this right, which, amounting per year to 4,600,000 dirhems, was divided among 400 persons who
received from 10,000

[PDF p. 286]

to 3,000 dirhems, each of the emirs receiving between 40,000 and 10,000 dirhems. It was a frightful right
that brought in enormous sums; the Copts drew considerable benefits from it, but the poor people
experienced great damages from it and underwent, because of this very right, all sorts of injustices and
prejudices; the damage indeed went multiplying: the sailors stole (the grain during transport), the
measurers falsified the measures, the chiefs of the octroi, the employees too, all stole something. The
right was fixed at two dirhems per ardeb for the sultan, but a half-dirhem more was exacted, without
speaking of what had been subtracted and stolen. There existed, for the collection of this right, a local
known under the name of Hut of the Measuring, on the bank of the river, at Boulaq; there stood a chief,
sixty superior employees -- writers, inspectors, and overseers -- and thirty soldiers to watch, and no
one could sell a qodah of grain in any place in Egypt; all the grains to be sold had to be transported to
the Hut of the Measuring at Boulaq.

Among other rights, the sultan also abolished the half of brokerage. Here is in what this right
consisted: if someone sells something, he pays the broker, according to an anciently established usage,
two dirhems for a hundred dirhems; but when Naser el-din El-Kerkhi was named vizier, he imposed each
broker with one dirhem on his brokerage of two dirhems. The broker then did all his possible to recover
his benefit, and it was again the seller who had to bear the damage; one complained, but far from
listening to them, the complainants were beaten, and this lasted until this right was suppressed by the
sultan.

Another right abolished by him is the right of valiyat. It was a right conceded to the valis and the
chiefs, and that these two categories of personages collected from the directors of markets and brothels.
This right was abandoned to a farmer who had under his orders a great number of agents and employees,
emirs and others. This right gave birth to hideous injustices and infamous procedures; many respectable
people were wronged, and a number of private houses were violated.

Among other rights, he also abolished the right of belt and mule, established on the town and on all the
southern and northern provinces of Egypt. Each of the valis and the chiefs was held to bring, at the
period when the payments were effected,

[PDF p. 287]

to the Beit el-Mal (treasury), 1,000 dirhems for the price of the belt and 500 dirhems for the price of
the mule. Many people lived from this right, whose amount was set apart; the people suffered on this
subject indescribable miseries, and what the couriers (of the divan) made them endure was worse than
death.

Among the rights abolished was the right of prison, a right collected from each prisoner; every jailer
had the right to levy from a prisoner six dirhems, without prejudice to the rest (what he had been
condemned to). Many persons lived from this right, the farmers sought it and put up high bids to obtain
the concession of it, for it produced a rich revenue. Indeed, if a man quarreled with his wife or his
son, the vali had him put in prison and, as soon as he had entered, even were he to stay there only an
instant, the right in question was levied on him; it was the same for the prison of the cadi.

Among the rights abolished was the right of tax of chickens; this right was conceded to numerous farmers,
spread through all the provinces of Egypt, who forced the people to take their chickens; thus the weak
people experienced great damages on this account, the widows especially had to bear considerable
vexations and prejudices. Many people lived from this right, and no one, in any province, could buy one
or several chickens unless they came from the farmer, and if by chance someone bought or sold a chicken
other than those coming from the farmer, death came to him from all sides, and yet he did not die (Koran,
XIV, 20).

Of these rights is also the right of the cavaliers; the valis of each province were charged with the
collection in all the villages, and there was no one who, paying one dirhem (of tax), did not have to pay
two others; this right caused the taxpayers frightful terrors.

Of these rights is also the right of the canes and the presses; it is a right collected from the
cultivators of sugarcane and the proprietors and people of the press.

Of these rights is the right called right of weddings; it was collected in all the provinces; it counted
numerous farmers and had absolutely nothing fixed: one struck the people with a right that one collected;
and this right caused them unjust damages.

[PDF p. 288]

Of these rights is the protection of the boats, consisting in what was collected from each boat; it is a
fixed right known under the name of protection of the boats; it is one of the most vexatious rights for
the people, for it is collected from all those who travel on the river, even from the beggars and the
poor.

Of these rights is the right of the singing-women, which consists in what is gathered from the
prostitutes and the courtesans, and which is collected from the vilest people by the chief of the royal
office.

Of these rights is the right of guarantee; it is a right struck specially on the blacks at the inspection
of the boats; it is established on the black men or women discovered there at the moment they go down
into the inns to give themselves over to prostitution; it is collected from all, male or female; it is a
fixed right.

The right of harrowing, which is collected in all the provinces by the engineers of the country and paid
into the treasury by the aides of the vali who gather it. From this right live many people of the army.

The right of emptying, which consists in what is collected for the cleaning of the cesspits; all the
filth drawn from them is carried to the hills. If the pit of a mosque, a school, a scalding-house, a
tomb, or any house belonging to anyone whatever is full, even were the mass of filth considerable, it is
not permitted to the proprietor to remove it as long as he has not received the visit of the farmer of
the emptyings, who for the dredging asks the price that pleases him; the farmer gives himself importance
and asks double what the work is worth. If the master of the house does not accept the price asked by the
farmer, the latter leaves him and goes away; but as it is not possible to leave the filth, the proprietor
makes the farmer come back; the latter increases his pretensions and becomes harder and harder, until at
the end one consents to what he exacts for the cleaning of the pit; then he removes the filth it
contains.

Among the vexations suppressed by the sultan, one must count the inspectors of the provinces. All Egypt,
south and north, small and great villages, swarmed with writers and tormentors of every kind; the sultan
suppressed the inspectors and abolished the inspections in all the provinces, except the districts where
there were royal properties. And God, by the suppression of these taxes, relieved [...]

[PDF p. 289]

his creatures of miseries whose extent one cannot imagine and which one could not describe.

The sultan, having abolished these rights and finished the distribution of the fiefs to the emirs and
the army, set apart for the royal treasury, in the way of Egyptian lands, a good part of the lands
constituting the fiefs of the Bordjites, such as Ghizeh and its province, Hou, Korn el-Ahmar,
Manfalout, El-Marg, Khoussous, and others, which formed the ten qirats of the country. The fiefs of the
emirs and the army, etc., represented fourteen qirats. The Copts, wherever they could, used cunning;
they set about weakening the army of Egypt, distributing a single fief over several points -- part in
the Said, part in the Sharqieh, part in the Gharbieh -- to fatigue the soldier and increase his
trouble. The right of protection (on the non-Muslims) was taken by them from the royal treasury and
distributed among the districts where there were fiefs of emirs and army; for the Christians depended on
only a single divan, as you will see later, God willing! The Christians of each village paid their due
to the feudatory of that country, and the situation became favorable to the Christians, who moved from
one village to another and paid of the tax only what they wished; thus this chapter of receipts
diminished after having been most productive. As for the other chapters of taxes -- for example the food
right intended to defray the (sultan's) table -- they appropriated them and paid only what they wished.
Then they monopolized the expense of what is employed for the upkeep of the table; and the emirs as well
as the chiefs of the divans had to occupy themselves with the affairs of octroi rights.

Then the sultan examined what the two emirs Baïbars El-Gashanqir and Salar, lieutenant of the sultanate,
held in the way of lands, and he took all that was inscribed in the name of these two emirs and in the
name of their servants, without excepting what they had placed in wakf, which he unbound; and of the
whole he formed fiefs, adding to each fief what was paid as due by the peasant; he made the count of
these dues, eliminated them from the ensemble of the revenue of the fiefs, and abolished the presents;
he finished this work only at the end of the year. And when the moon of Moharrem of the year 716 rose
and the accounts had been established according to the third of the yield of the harvests of the year
715, the sultan sat in the Iouan he had had built in the Citadel of the Mountain; he had transmitted to
all the lieutenants of

[PDF p. 290]

the army, by verbal instruction transmitted by the general-in-chief, the order to present himself with
his warriors. And each day he reviewed two emirs and their troops; each emir commanding a thousand men
stood there with his troop, and the intendant of the army made, in the presence of this emir, the roll
call of his men according to their grade. And the intendant of the army, as each of the men was brought
by his general, presented them one after another to the sultan. The latter, as soon as the man was in
his presence, interrogated him himself and without intermediary on his name, his origin, his race,
inquiring about the duration of his stay in Egypt, those with whom he had come, the emir to whom he
belonged, and other things -- the combats he had attended during the war, what he knew of the military
trade, etc. When the interrogation was finished, he put into his hands a title without examining it and
such as God had designated; and no one, during the duration of the review, passed without his knowing
him and without his speaking of him afterward to the emirs to recall something concerning him. The order
had been given to the emirs to gather at the Iouan, and none of them dared disobey the sultan for fear of
some punishment. They were therefore there silent, no one daring to speak, for fear of displeasing the
sultan by his words, for he took pleasure in contradicting the emirs, and if the latter praised someone
during the review, the sultan gave that one the title of a bad fief. Having perceived this, the emirs
abstained from saying the least word, and the sultan did his affairs without them, and one knows no
soldier who presented himself before him without his having interrogated him, inquiring whether he was a
mameluke, from what merchant he had been bought, and all that we have said above. If it was an old man,
he asked him his age, his origin, how many combats he had attended, until he knew everything. He had the
infirm set apart and gave them no lands but handed to each of them a pension sufficient to make him live.
The review lasted all the month of Moharrem, and on the titles of the army he economized two hundred of
them. Then he reviewed the different categories of the sultan's mamelukes, made great economies on their
pay, and suppressed many pensions that he replaced with fiefs. Finally he assigned certain tax revenues
to the invalids of the army, whose pay he diminished, and fixed for each of them an annual pension of
3,000 dirhems.

[PDF p. 291]

Beibars and Salar El-Goukandar had frequent dealings with the treasury and the provinces -- such as
Ghizeh and Alexandria -- whether for commercial affairs or as a consequence of protections they accorded
to certain persons; the sultan took all this for himself and made this state of things cease. What he
did not distribute in fief was joined to the particular divan. Among other orders he gave at the review,
he prescribed that no one sell a title he had received from the sultan, even were the fief designated by
this title too mean, nor that any emir speak in favor of a man of the army. If anyone contravened these
orders, he was beaten, imprisoned, exiled, and his pay was diminished. Thus the king was much dreaded
and his prohibitions strictly respected, and no one ever dared sell a title given by the sultan, and no
emir ventured to speak in favor of anyone. Many people had fiefs of a thousand dinars that were reduced
to two hundred dinars, but many others who had had very poor fiefs obtained considerable fiefs, for the
sultan gave the title without examining it and such as it fell under his hand.

It happened, with the permission of God, that the sultan, among the people of his kitchen, had a buffoon
who joked in his presence; the sultan laughed at him, amused himself with him, and was not angered by the
jokes he might say. One day, the sultan was attending the review in the garden of the Citadel of the
Mountain, surrounded by the cortege of the intimate emirs, when this buffoon arrived and set about joking
according to his custom to make the king laugh. "I found," he said, "a warrior of the repartition of
El-Naser mounted on a nag, his sack on his back and his lance on his shoulder," thus mixing joke and
satire. The sultan entered into a violent anger and cried: "Seize him, and remove his garments!" The
guards ran and seized the man, whom they stripped of his garments, attached to the saqieh with the
buckets, and beat the oxen with all their might, which imprinted on the saqieh a rapid movement of
rotation. And the poor devil followed the movement of the pots, now plunging into the water, now coming
out of it to fall back again, passing and repassing in the water for nearly an hour, in such a way that
his voice died out and he thought he would die. Great was the terror of the emirs in seeing the violence
of the sultan's anger. Then the emir Taghaï El-Douadar advanced with the group of particular emirs, and
all together asked the pardon of the unfortunate man,

[PDF p. 292]

saying that he had wished to joke and make the sultan laugh by his words, without wounding intention for
the army and other similar reasons, so that the sultan gave the order to detach him; he was without
movement, and he had to be dragged before the sultan, who decided that, if he were still alive, he must
not pass the night in Egypt; and he was made to leave immediately into exile. And God was glorified by
each of the emirs that they had dared to break the silence at the moment of the review.

The state of Egypt remained such as El-Naser had established it in this cadastre until the power of the
Beni Qalaoun passed into the hands of El-Melek El-Zaher Barqouq, in the month of Ramadan of the year 784
[8 November to 7 December 1382]. The ensemble was maintained in the same state, but certain parts
disappeared progressively until the year of the events and disasters of 806 [21 July 1403 to 9 July
1404], the period when all sorts of changes took place and when injustice reached proportions no one can
imagine and which will be fully explained to you in the book of the Causes of the Ruin of the Provinces
of Egypt, God willing.

There were for the lands of Egypt determined quantities of seed that remained in the provinces; they were
divided into two categories: the royal seed and the local seed. The royal seed had been deposited in the
country by the kings. The emir or the soldier, as long as he was in possession of his fief, took what was
necessary to him of the royal seed, but, if he left the fief, these seeds were reclaimed from him. After
the institution of the cadastre of El-Naser, the seed of each province was determined by the sultan and
inscribed at the royal divan. Their total amounted to 160,000 ardebs, without counting the local seed.

[PDF p. 293]

CHAPTER XXXIII
OF THE DIVAN

The greatest among the cadis, Abou-l-Hassan El-Mawardi, writes this: "The divan is maintained as long as
are maintained the things that pertain to the rights of the sultan, whether as works or as revenues, and
those charged with them are the troop and the governors." On the origin of the word divan there are two
versions: (1) Cosroes (Khosrow), looking one day at the writers of his divan, saw them occupied in
counting mentally and cried: "Dyouaneh!" (the madmen), and this name was given to the place where these
employees gathered. Then the [letter] disappeared by usage and the word was softened to divan. (2)
Dyouan is the Persian name of the demons; and this qualification was given to the accountants because
they resolve affairs, because they know those that are visible and those that are hidden, because they
can gather scattered and distant things, and because they know equally those that are near and those
that are far. Then this name was given to the place of their gatherings, and one said divan.

The writings of the divan are of three sorts: writings of the army, writings of the tax, and writings of
redaction and correspondence. It is beyond doubt that all the powers have employed these three categories
of writings. The scholars have published numerous works on the writings of the tax and those of
correspondence, but I know no one who has composed anything whatever on the writing of the army and the
troops.

At the beginning of Islam, the writing was traced on rolled sheets, but toward the end of the time of the
Ommiades, when Abd Allah ben Mohammed Abou-l-Abbas El-Safah mounted the throne, he took as vizier Khaled
ben Barmak, who succeeded Abou Selama Hafs ben Soliman El-Khalal, and he introduced into the ministries
registers of parchment, whose use prevailed; the rolls were abandoned, and this lasted until the time
when Gafar ben Yahia ben Barmak took the direction of affairs under the caliphate of El-Rachid. This
vizier had [...]

[PDF p. 294]

put into use the paper everyone has used since, until the present.

Abou-l-Nimr the paper-maker said: Abou Hazem El-Qadi recounted to me that Abou-l-Hassan ben El-Modabber
had told him that if Egypt were completely cultivated, it would produce a revenue equal to the revenue of
the whole world; according to him, the cultivable lands of Egypt amount to 28,000,000 feddans, but there
is only one million feddans cultivated. And Ibn Modabber told me that he had been employed at the divan
of the East and at that of the West and that he had never passed a night having finished all his work
without anything remaining of it; that he had served also in Egypt, that he stayed up very late there,
but that there always remained work to him that he finished the next day.

[PDF p. 295]

CHAPTER XXXIV
OF THE DIVAN OF THE TROOPS AND OF THE ARMY

The first to establish a divan for the army and the horses was, it is said, Kiharasp, one of the kings of
the second Persian dynasty; before him, Kiqbad levied the tenth of the grains for the food of the army.
As for the times of Islam, here is what one reads in the extracts made by El-Bokhari and Moslim in the
traditions reported by Hozaïfat: The Prophet said: Write me the name of all those who believe in Islam,
and a list of 2,500 names was written for him, which are cited by El-Bokhari in the chapter that bears
this title: How the imams inscribed the people. Bokhari cites again a tradition of Abd Allah ben Abbas: A
man came to the Prophet and said to him: "O prophet of God, I am inscribed for war and my wife wants to
make the pilgrimage." "Go," said the Prophet, "and make the pilgrimage with your wife." 'Amr ben Monabbat
reports the following trait on the authority of Moamer, who had it from Qoutadat: The last thing the
Prophet received was the sending of 800,000 dirhems dispatched from El-Bahreïn, and he did not leave the
council until after having entirely distributed them. The Prophet had no treasury, no more than Abou
Bekr; the first to have one was Omar ben El-Khattab. Ibn Sha'b says that Omar was the first to organize a
divan. According to Ibn Sa'd, Aïchat would have said: My father divided the booty, and the first year he
gave to the free men 10, to the slaves 10, to the free women 10, to the slaves 10; the second year, he
divided it again, and to each he gave 20. Here, according to what is recounted, is the cause that brought
on the creation of a divan: Abou Harirat having come to Omar with the money of El-Bahreïn, Omar asked
him: "What do you bring me?" "500,000 dirhems," said Abou Harirat. Omar found the sum enormous and said:
"Do you know what that is (500,000 dirhems)?" "Yes, certainly," said the other, "it is five times a
hundred thousand." "Is all this of legitimate provenance?" asked Omar. "I know nothing of it," answered
Abou Harirat. Then Omar mounted the pulpit, glorified and praised God, and said: "O men,

[PDF p. 296]

much money has come to us. If you wish, we will measure it by the keïleh; if you wish, we will count it."
A man approached him and said to him: "O Commander of the Faithful, I have seen the Persians make use of
divans; install a divan, you too." And Omar installed it.

On the other hand, the reason given for the installation of the divan would be that while Omar was
preparing an expedition, he had near him Hormezan, who said to him: "You have paid the salary of the men
composing this army corps, but if one of them deserts, how will his lieutenant know it? Create then for
them a divan." Omar asked what a divan was, and Hormezan explained it to him. Omar at once took counsel of
the Muslims on the subject of the installation of this divan. Aly ben Abou Taleb said to him: "Each year
you will divide all the money you will have gathered without conserving anything for yourself." Othman
said: "I see that much money is distributed to the people without it being possible to distinguish those
who have received some from those to whom nothing has been given, and I fear the harm will only
progress." Khaled ben El-Oualid said: "I have been in Syria and I saw that the kings had created divans
there and gathered armies. Create then, you too, a divan, and you will gather armies." Omar held to this
opinion and summoned Aqil ben Abou Taleb, Mokhrama ben Noufal, and Gebir ben Mota'am, writers of the
tribe of Qoreïch, and said to them: "Inscribe the name of the people by tribe." These writers began with
the Beni Hachem and inscribed them; they continued with the Aoulad Abou Bekr and their tribe, then with
'Amr and his tribe, and so on, inscribing all the tribes according to the order of succession of the
caliphs. They brought the result of their work to Omar, who, having examined it, said to them: "No, begin
with the close relatives of the Envoy of God, the closest being inscribed first, and you will put Omar in
the rank where it has pleased God to put him." Abbas thanked him for this act and said: "You show yourself
generous toward your relatives." There is no agreement on the subject of the year in which Omar
established the attributions of the divan and the divan itself. It was, according to El-Kebbi, in the
year 15 [14 February 636 to 1 February 637]; according to Ibn Sa'd, who reports the opinion of Omar
El-Ouaqedi, it was in the year 20 [21 December 640 to 9 December 641]. El-Zaheri says it was in the month
of Moharrem of the year 20 of the hijra [21 December 640 to 19 January 641].

[PDF p. 297]

It is reported that when God had given the Muslims Qadisiat and Omar had finished the conquest of Syria,
the latter gathered the Muslims and said to them: "What is the vali permitted to levy on the money?" And
all answered: "For himself personally, enough to feed himself and his family neither too luxuriously nor
too poorly, enough to clothe his family and himself during the winter and during the summer, and finally
enough to maintain two mounts that will serve him in war and for his affairs and that can lead him to the
pilgrimage and the visit of the holy places; as for the rest, it will be divided equitably. Let the
inhabitants of each country receive a share proportioned to the importance of their country; let one
occupy oneself next with putting back in order the affairs of private persons, let one come to their aid
in misfortune and keep calamities away from them, beginning with the people who pay the tribute, and let
the benefits extend to the vanquished as much as the amount of the revenue will permit." El-Dahak, on the
authority of Ibn Abbas, says: "After the conquest of Qadisiat and the conclusion of the treaty with the
people of the Suad, after the submission of Damascus, and when peace was signed with Syria, Omar said to
his men: 'Gather and inform me of what you know on what God has attributed as share of the revenue to the
people of Qadisiat and to the Syrians.'" The opinion of Aly was conformable to that of Omar, and both
drew their answer from the Koran: "What God," they said, "has attributed to his envoy on the share of the
people of the villages (that is, the fifth), that is to God and to his prophet (that is, to God the order
and to the Prophet the distribution), to his relatives, to the orphans, to the poor" (Koran, LIX, 7), and
they explained this verse by the following verse, which is its continuation: "to the poor among the
Mohagerins," to the end (Koran, LIX, 8), and they took four fifths according to the agreed division that
attributed a fifth to those composing the first, second, and third categories and four fifths to those to
whom God had devolved the booty. And as proof, they cited what God says: "Know that when you have made a
booty, the fifth part reverts to God" (Koran, VIII, 42), etc., to the end of the verse of these three
categories and the four fifths to those to whom God has attributed them. And the fifths were divided
according to this principle. Omar and Aly were of this opinion, and subsequently the Muslims conformed to
it. The distribution began with the Mohagerins, then one passed to the Ansari, then to the Tabeïn who had
fought with them and assisted them, then pensions were established,

[PDF p. 298]

levied on the revenue, in favor of those who had negotiated the peace or who had aided the peace by war,
but this gratification was a simple complaisance. In the division into fifths, nothing was provided for
the people who refuse the protection, but their share was instituted by the one who had imposed it on
them, and in this share was comprised that of the people who had brought them to it, unless of their own
will they renounced it; thus there were found among them some who did not receive what was due to them.

According to Abou Salamah ben Abd el-Rahman ben 'Ouf, Omar would have said: "I intend to institute
pensions for the army of the Muslims and to organize for it a divan in order to establish justice." Abd
el-Rahman ben 'Ouf, Othman, and Aly said: "Begin with yourself." "No," said Omar, "I will begin only with
the uncle of the Prophet, and I will continue with his closest relatives and so on." He therefore set
aside a share for Abbas and began with him; then he assigned to the warriors who had attended the affair
of Bedr 5,000 (dirhems?) per person; to those who had taken part in the combats subsequent to that of
Bedr until the affair of El-Hadibiah, 4,000 (dirhems) per head; to those who had taken part in the
combats engaged after El-Hadibiah until the victory of Abou Bekr over the apostates, 3,000 (dirhems)
each, and in this category he included those who had attended the conquest and the combats fought by Abou
Bekr as well as those who attended the days prior to the conquest of Qadisiah, fixing for each of them a
share of 3,000 (dirhems). To the conquerors of Qadisiah and Syria and the combatants of El-Yarmouk, each
2,000 dirhems; those come from the distant countries had each 2,500 dirhems. And on this subject one said
to him: "You should treat on the same footing the conquerors of Qadisiah and the combatants of the prior
days." "No," he said, "I cannot treat on the same footing those who do not have an equal merit; God does
not permit it." "But," it was objected, "you treat equally those who fought far from their dwelling and
those who fought near their houses and for the defense of their hearths." "These," said Omar, "deserved
rather to be increased, for they upheld the right and had to bear the shock of the enemies. No, certainly,
far from treating them equally, I have treated each according to his merits; moreover," he added, "has it
not been the same for the Mohagerins, when we treated on the same footing the two categories so different
[...]

[PDF p. 299]

of the Mohagerins and the Ansaris? The Ansaris, too, did only defend their houses, while the Mohagerins
hastened from afar to their aid." Then he assigned to the Rouadefs (auxiliaries) who had come after the
conquest of Qadisiah and the battle of El-Yarmouk 3,000 dirhems each, treating equally all the men of
each category without making any difference among them: whether they were strong or weak, Arab or
foreign, all were treated equally in their categories, to such a point that every man of the towns who
had aided in gathering the booty and had followed the army of the Rouadefs received for his share 250
dirhems, and whoever had followed the Rouadefs was gratified with the fifth in addition to 200 dirhems
(240 dirhems?). The last to whom Omar assigned anything were the people of Hagar, who received each 200
dirhems.

When Omar died, things were still in the same state. Among the people of the category of Bedr, he
included four persons who had not attended Bedr: El-Hassan, El-Husseïn, Abou Zar, and Salman.

Abou Salamah says that Omar assigned to El-Abbas 25,000 (dirhems); El-Zaheri says he assigned him only
12,000; to the women of the people of Bedr he attributed 400 dirhems, to the women of those who had
attended the combats subsequent to Bedr until El-Aïam, before El-Qadisiah, 300 dirhems, to the women of
the conquerors of El-Qadisiah 200 dirhems; then all the women of those who had fought after Qadisiah were
treated equally, and the children of the combatants of Bedr and the others had each 100 dirhems. Finally
he had sixty poor people brought and had served them to eat, salted bread; the calculation was made of
what they had eaten, and it was found that this exceeded two shares of tax; and to every poor person,
whether he was Muslim or infidel, were attributed, to feed him and his family, two shares of tax payable
by monthly fractions. To the wives of the Prophet he gave 10,000 dirhems, except to those who had been
bought. And the mothers of the Muslims said: "The prophet of God made no difference between us and them
in the division, but treated us all equally; treat us equally, you too." And all received 10,000 dirhems.
He wished to give 2,000 dirhems more to Aïchat, but she refused. "It is," he said to her, "because your
situation with the Prophet was quite different; take this then and do with it what you will."

The army was classified by tens, and there were 3,000 chiefs commanding each

[PDF p. 300]

10 men. The horses received their provisions by sections. This continued thus until the founding of Koufah
and Basrah. Then the organization was changed: the chiefs of ten transformed into chiefs of seven, and
there were 100 chiefs, each having to supervise the distribution of 100,000 dirhems. Each group --
especially for the category of Qadisiah -- comprised 43 men, 43 women, and 50 persons of their families;
this group received 100,000 dirhems; each section of the category of El-Aïam counted 20 men, 3,020 (23?)
women, 100 persons of the family, the ensemble receiving 100,000 dirhems. Each section of the first
Rouadefs was composed of 60 men, 60 women, and 40 persons of their families, of those who received per
head 1,500 dirhems, together 100,000 dirhems. The pension was paid to the chiefs of seven and the
guardians of the flags; the flags were in the hands of the Arabs; these paid the sum to the chiefs of
squads, the lieutenants, and the intendants, who paid each of the men placed under their orders. Omar died
leaving things in this state, but he had before his death the intention of making the shares 4,000
dirhems, and said: "Certainly my intention was to make the shares 4,000 dirhems: 1,000 that the man would
spend for his family, 1,000 that he would carry on a journey, 1,000 for his upkeep, and 1,000 to give
alms." But he died without having been able to put his project into execution. He received the messengers
according to the length of the journey traveled: if they came from very far, he treated them for a year;
if they came from less far, he treated them for six months. If some man had committed a bad action in a
frontier post, he had his turban torn off; he was exposed in the mosque of his tribe and one cried: "Here
is so-and-so who has acted badly." Seif ben Omar says that the first distribution took place in the year
15 [14 February 636 to 1 February 637]. Subsequently Amr ben El-As sent to Omar ben El-Khattab the
tribute of Egypt after having retained what was necessary to him. When Othman became caliph, on the 3rd of
Moharrem of the year 24 [9 November 644], he increased the share of each person by 100 dirhems. He was
the first to make this increase and to succor the inhabitants of the towns. He was also

[PDF p. 301]

the first to come to their aid and do something for them. The caliphs took from him the custom of making
increases of shares. Omar had attributed to all the children born in the month of Ramadan 2 dirhems per
day and to each mother of a believer 2 dirhems; one said to him: "Would it not be better with this money
to give them to eat and gather them in common for that?" "One must," he answered, "satiate the people in
their houses." Othman persisted in this custom and added to it still the food for the month of Ramadan,
saying: "This is for those who pray and stay in the mosques and for the poor in the month of Ramadan." The
caliphs his successors followed his example.

Under the caliphate of Moawiah ben Abou Safian, there were in Egypt 40,000 men, of whom 4,000 received a
salary of 200 (dirhems), and one sent Moawiah only 600,000 dirhems that remained after the payment of the
army and the deduction of what was paid to the employees. Moawiah had designated for each of the Arab
tribes a man who, each morning, went around the tribe saying: "Has a child been born this night? Has a
traveler come down among you?" And one answered him: "A son has been born to so-and-so, or a daughter to
such a woman." And the man inscribed their name. Or else one informed him that a man of such a tribe had
come down among them with his family, and he inscribed the name of the traveler and the people of his
family. When he had finished his inquiry, he went to the divan to have the thing registered. Moslema ben
Moklad El-Ansari, emir of Egypt, after having paid the people of the divan their salary and that of their
family, their rations, the things they needed, the expenses required by the villages for the dikes, the
rations of the writers, the transport of the wheat to the Hedjaz, sent Moawiah 600,000 dinars that
remained. The first installation of a divan in Egypt was made by Amr ben El-As; the divan was reinstalled
anew by Abd el-Aziz ben Merwan, a third time again by Qorrat ben Sherik, and a fourth by Bichr ben
Safouan. After the reorganization of Bichr there were no more notable changes, with the exception however
of the attachment to the divan of the tribe of Qeïs, under the caliphate of Hesham ben Abd el-Melek ben
Merwan. When the domination of the Ommiades ceased and the black banner of the Abbasids prevailed, there
were some changes that continued until the death of Abd Allah El-Mamoun,

[PDF p. 302]

son of Haroun El-Rachid -- which occurred on the 7th of Rageb of the year 218 [29 July 833] -- and the
accession of his brother El-Mo'tasem Abou Ishaq Mohammed ben Haroun, who wrote to Kander ben Naser
El-Safadi, emir of Egypt, a letter ordering him to eliminate from the divan of Egypt all the Arabs there
and to suppress their pay; which was done. Merwan ben Mohammed El-Ga'di, the last of the Ommiade caliphs,
had suppressed the pay of the troops of Egypt for one year, after which he wrote them the following letter
to excuse himself: "Last year, I suppressed your pay, for an enemy threatened me and I needed money. But I
have the salary of the past year sent to you with that of the current year, eat it then and may it profit
you! God keep me from being the one by whose hands the suppression of the pay will be made!" When Kander
suppressed the salary of the Egyptians, Yahia, son of the vizier El-Geraoui, revolted with a troop of
people of the tribes of Lakhm and Gozam and said to Kander: "Nothing more grave could be done against us,
for right and justice have been refused us." And he gathered around him 500 men. Kander died in the month
of Rabi' el-Akher of the year 219 [15 April to 13 May 834], and his son El-Mazfar was named vali of Egypt
in his place. He marched against Yahia, beat him in the marshes of Tannis, and took him prisoner. The
power of the Arabs weakened in Egypt, and the armies were no longer composed there but of foreigners and
slaves, from El-Motasem until the emirate of Abou-l-Abbas Ahmed ben Touloun in Egypt. The latter increased
the number of slaves, which rose to more than 24,000 young Turks, 40,000 negroes, and 7,000 free men for
hire. His son, the emir Abou-l-Geich Khamarouyah, increased the number still after him by recruiting the
able-bodied men of the Houf of Egypt. When the emir Abou Bekr Mohammed ben Tafag El-Akhshid became emir of
Egypt, the effective of his army, in Egypt and in Syria, reached 400,000 men of very diverse races. Later,
master Abou-l-Mesk Kafour El-Akhchidi recruited new negroes during his government of Egypt, and when the
imam El-Moez lidin Allah Abou Tamim Mo'ad El-Fatimi seized Egypt, his army was composed of people of the
tribes of Qoutama, Zouïla, and other Berber peoples, with whom were mixed Greeks and Sla-

[PDF p. 303]

vonians (Slavs), who numbered as has been said. With them advanced Mo'add, whose army was innumerable;
there was no limit in what God had accorded him, and he was happy in all that could make happy; to such a
point that it has been said that since Alexander, son of Philip, the Macedonian, no army more numerous
than that of El-Moezz had trodden the earth. At his death his son El-Aziz billah Abou Mansour Nazar,
having become caliph of Egypt, took into his pay Dilemites and Turks of whom he formed his particular
escort. The emir El-Mokhtar Abd el-Melek El-Mesihi recounts in his history that when El-Aziz set out for
Syria, the particular treasury was carried by two thousand camels, without counting the treasures of the
generals and the great ones of the kingdom.

Ibn Miser reports in his history that the particular slaves of the lady mother of El-Mostanser billah
Abou Tamim Moadd ben El-Zaher li-azz din Allah Abou-l-Hossan Aly ben El-Hakem biamr Allah Abou Aly Mansour
ben El-Aziz billah numbered 5,000, without counting the corps of troops. And I have seen a writing in the
hand of El-As'ad ben Mamati saying that the effective of the army of Egypt, in the time of Rouzaïq ben
El-Saleh Talaï ben Rouzaïq, was 40,000 cavalry and 36,000 infantry. Another author adds to it 10 sea
vessels carrying 10,000 combatants, and this at the moment of the decline of the Fatimid domination. And
when the empire passed from the Fatimids into the hands of El-Melek El-Naser Salah el-din Youssef ben
Ayoub, this prince suppressed in the army of Egypt the black slaves, the Egyptian emirs, the Bedouins, the
Armenians, and others still, and composed the army above all of Kurds and Turks, and the effective of his
troops in Egypt did not exceed 120,000 cavalry. After the death of Salah el-din, this army dispersed, and
there remained to his son El-Melek El-Aziz Othman only 8,500 cavalry; only, some of these cavalry had ten
servants, others twenty, others more still, some possessed up to a hundred attached to their single
person; in such a way that when they mounted on horseback to leave Cairo, their total number exceeded
200,000 men. But continually they quarreled and mutinied, and the power ended by passing into the hands of
their slaves, the Turkish mamelukes, who followed the example of their Ayoubite masters and took for
soldiers Turks and a certain number of Kurds, reinforced by slaves sent in great number from the Turkish
countries, so that one was able to say that the number of the mamelukes of El-Melek [...]

[PDF p. 304]

El-Mansour Qalaoun amounted to 7,000 according to some, to 12,000 according to others. Those of his son
El-Achraf Khalil ben Qalaoun numbered 12,000. But subsequently their number was far from reaching this
figure, and it went declining until the fall of the dynasty of the Beni Qalaoun in the month of Ramadan
784 [8 November to 7 December 1382], the period when the power passed into the hands of El-Melek El-Zaher
Barqouq, who eliminated little by little the mamelukes of El-Achraf and chose for his particular guard
Circassian mamelukes whose number reached, both in bought slaves and in mercenaries, the figure of 4,000
men and even a little more. At his death, his son El-Naser Farrag having mounted the throne, these
mamelukes divided and mutinied, and when Naser died, a great number of them had perished, slaughtered or
in any other manner. The Egyptian army was, under the Turkish domination, divided into two classes: the
troops of the guard and the royal mamelukes. The period when the effective of the troops of the guard was
the highest is that of El-Naser Mohammed ben Qalaoun; at that moment, according to what I have been able
to see by the archives of the divan of the army and in the papers of the cadastre of El-Naser, it counted
24,000 cavalry; from that time until today their number has always been declining; now this effective is
very weak and moreover a thousand men of these troops are not even worth a single one, for they serve no
purpose and are incapable of repulsing the enemy. As for the mamelukes, their number today is reduced to
very little, so that in gathering the troops of the guard and the royal mamelukes one would scarcely
reach the figure of 5,000 cavalry, of whom a thousand and perhaps fewer are fit for combat. They are
today also divided into two classes: the troops of the guard and the royal mamelukes. The latter are
divided into three corps: the Zaheris, the Naseris, and the Mayadis, the latter subdividing in their turn
into Hakemis, Nourouzis, and Moayadis proper. I greatly fear that after El-Melek El-Moayad Abou-l-Naser
Sheikh (may God maintain his reign!) there may be some troubles until the moment when God has strengthened
his son the emir Sarem el-Din Ibrahim (may God multiply his protection over him!), who has conquered in
the Greek country what no king of Egypt had ever conquered before him, since Islam: the

[PDF p. 305]

[verses:] The lion-cub by its form is similar to the lion; the son of the noble, if he is of a noble
character, is nobler than his father; it is not surprising that the son follows the example of his
father; Adi imitated his father in generosity; he who resembles his father never does ill; it is from
the root that the tree rises.

Under the reign of El-Achraf Barsebai, the mamelukes formed seven corps: the Zaheris, the Naseris, the
Moayadis, the Nourouzis, the Hakemis, the Tatars, and the Achrafis; each of these corps was differentiated
from the others, thus their force was diminished and their violence subdued, and the sultan could confide
in their guard without having to dread revolt, thanks to the division that existed among them although in
appearance they were united, and to the enmity that existed among them although they seemed all in accord.

The Ommiade, Abbaside, and Fatimid caliphs had the habit, since the reign of Omar ben El-Khattab, of
receiving personally the money of the tax. Later the divan distributed it among the divans, the
governors, or the army according to the importance and the rank of each; at the beginning of Islam this
distribution took the name of present. This custom persisted until the time of the foreign domination,
the period when the order of things was changed and the land was distributed in fiefs to the army.
According to what is known, the first to distribute fiefs to the army was Nozam El-Mulk Abou Aly
El-Hassan ben Aly ben Ishaq ben Abbas El-Tousi, vizier of El-Barchelan ben Daoud ben Mikal ben Seldjouq.
Then the caliph named as vizier his own son Melek Shah ben El-Barchelan because of the extent of the
empire. The latter was of the opinion of giving to each employee a village, or more or less, according to
the importance of the salary of that employee; for he thought that in confiding the lands directly to the
employees, they would be improved under the surveillance of the latter, which would not happen if all the
lands depended on a single divan, for the hole would only enlarge and ruin would introduce itself into
the country. Nozam el-Mulk did thus, and by this rendered the lands prosperous and increased the yield of
the harvests. The kings his successors followed this example from the year 480 [8 April 1087 to 26 March
1088] until our days. The caliph was paid by the treasury, and 'Ata ben El-Saïb reports, in his
Chronicles, that when Abou Bekr became caliph, there was assigned to him the

[PDF p. 306]

half of a sheep per day and a garment to cover his head and his belly; he reports also, on the authority
of Hamid ben Halal, that there was accorded to the caliph also two cloaks; when these cloaks were worn
out, he had to deposit them at the divan and take two others; but, if he set out on a journey, he was
given a mount. For the expense of his house, it remained the same as in the time that had preceded his
accession to the caliphate. Ibn El-Athir, in his Chronicles, says that it is to this caliph that 6,000
dinars per year were attributed, and that there was assigned to Omar ben El-Khattab, when he became
caliph, a sum sufficient to permit him to live at ease, he and his family. Aly said to him on this
subject: "You will have nothing else." And the people cried: "Aly is right; let Omar have enough to feed
himself." Omar accorded to Moawiah ben Abou Safian, when he named him governor of Syria, an annual salary
of 10,000 dinars; according to certain authors, he would have given him only 1,000 dinars, which is more
probable.

[PDF p. 307]

CHAPTER XXXV
OF THE PARCELING-OUT AND OF THE FIEFS

One says "to withdraw a portion of a thing" for "to take it"; one names "portions" what one withdraws from
a thing; the expression [Arabic] means "permit me to take a part"; the words [Arabic] mean "he asked
permission to take a share of it"; and the phrase [Arabic] is translated by "he accorded him a share of
it -- land and water." The prophet of God made distributions and showed himself generous toward the
people of Islam, and after him the caliphs made distributions among those they judged worthy to receive
shares.

Ibn Abou Nagih reports, on the authority of Abou ben Chaïb, who had it from his father, that the Prophet
having given a land in share to the people of Mouzaïnah or of Gouhaïnah, these did not cultivate it. There
came people who cultivated it. The Gouhaïnins or the Mouzaïnins lodged a complaint before Omar ben
El-Khattab, who said to them: "If this terrain came to you from me or from Abou Bekr, I could return it to
you, but it comes to you from the prophet of God. And," he added, "if someone possesses a land and leaves
it three years without cultivating it and other people cultivate it, the latter are more worthy to possess
it than that one."

Hecham ben Arouah reports, on the authority of his father, that the prophet of God gave in share to
El-Zobeïr a land in which were palms belonging to the Beni Nachir; and he adds that this land was named
El-Garf. The same author recounts that Omar ben El-Khattab divided the whole 'Aqiq among the people, in
such a way that one encroached on the share of Arouah. Ibn Zobeïr then said: "Let those who ask for fiefs
present themselves today. For if there is in this some good, it is under my foot." Khouat ben Gebir said
to him: "Give it to me as a share," and he gave it to him. Safian ben 'Eïnah reports, on the authority of
Amr ben Dinar, that when the Prophet

[PDF p. 308]

arrived at Medina, he gave a fief to Abou Bekr and another to Omar ben El-Khattab. Ach'ath ben Souar
recounts, on the authority of Habib ben Abou Thabet, who had it from Soit El-Makki, who had it from Abou
Rafeh, that the prophet of God had given a land to people powerless to cultivate it and who sold it, in
the time of Omar ben El-Khattab, for 1,000 dinars and 80,000 dirhems, a sum they deposited in the hands of
Aly ben Abou Taleb. When they wished to withdraw their money, they perceived that the sum had diminished.
"Some is missing," they said to Aly. "Make the count of the alms," said the latter. And having made the
count of the alms, they found the sum exact. "Do you think," Aly said to them, "that I receive money
without levying the alms?" Tamim El-Dari had asked the Prophet as a fief the fiefs of his native country
situated in Syria, before the conquest of that country; the Prophet accorded it to him. Abou Thalebat
El-Khashni asked as a share a land still in the power of the Greeks; the Prophet, surprised, said: "Do you
hear what he says?" But Abou Thalebat answered: "He who sent you to spread justice will make you conquer
it." And the Prophet wrote him on this subject a letter (of donation). Thabet ben Sa'd reports, on the
authority of his father, who had it from his grandfather, that El-Abiad ben Gemal asked the Prophet as a
fief the salt-marshes of Mareb; the Prophet having accorded it to him, El-Aqra' ben Habas El-Tamimi cried:
"O prophet of God, I visited these salt-marshes in the time of ignorance; they are situated in a land that
contains nothing other than this salt; whoever goes there takes it; it is like sweet water on the earth."
And El-Abiad having renounced, the Prophet said to him: "I accept it from you." "Accept it then as alms,"
said El-Abiad. "That is," said the Prophet, "indeed, an alms on your part; for this salt is like sweet
water, whoever goes there can take it."

Kethir ben Abd Allah ben 'Ouf el-Mazni reports, on the authority of his father, who had it from his
grandfather, that the Prophet gave in fief to Bilal ben El-Hareth the mines of the south, in surface and
in depth; and Malek reports on the authority of Rabiat, who had it from several scholars of the tribe,
that the prophet of God gave in fief to Bilal ben Hareth El-Mazni mines situated in the vicinity of
El-Fara'. According to this same Rabiat, who had it from El-Hareth ben Bilal, who had it from his father
Bilal ben Hareth, the Prophet would have given him the whole 'Aqiq, and according to Hamad ben Salamat,
who had it from Abou Makin, who had it [...]

[PDF p. 309]

from Abou 'Akrama, servant of Bilal ben El-Hareth, that the Prophet had given in fief to Bilal a land
where there was a mountain enclosing mines. The Beni Bilal sold a part of it to Omar ben Abd El-Aziz, who
discovered there the mine -- the two mines, according to others. The Beni Bilal then said to him: "We sold
you only a cultivable land and not the mine," and they brought the letter of the Prophet that they kept in
a roll. Omar took the roll, kissed it, placed it on his eyes, and said to his secretary: "Examine what the
mine has brought in and the expenses that have been made; make the difference and give them the surplus."

Omar ben El-Khattab chose, among the terrains of El-Souad, the properties of Kesra (Chosroes) and his
family, as well as what had been abandoned by the proprietors or whose proprietors were dead. The total of
the revenues amounted to 9,000,000 dirhems, which were employed for the well-being of the Muslims, and
nothing of it was given in fief. Later Othman made the distribution of it, persuaded that the parceling-out
would increase the harvests, which would not happen by acting otherwise. He agreed with those among whom
he divided it that he would levy on them the tax-right, and the sum of the harvest amounted to 50,000,000
dirhems, which he employed in alms and presents. The caliphs who succeeded him made various modifications,
and when came the year of the skulls in 82 [15 February 701 to 3 February 702], at the time of the revolt
of Abd El-Rahman ben El-Ach'ath, the divan was burned, and each took in land what was within his reach.

Omar ben El-Khattab gave in fief to Ibn Sander Miniet-El-Asbagh; Sander reserved for himself 1,000
feddans. Ouaki', on the authority of Safian, who had it from Gaber El-Ga'fi, who had it from 'Amer, says:
Neither Abou Bekr, nor Omar, nor Aly gave fiefs; the first to give some was Othman, and under the
caliphate of Othman the lands were sold. El-Leitz ben Sa'd says: We have never known that Omar gave any
fief to anyone in Egypt, except the one conceded to Ibn Sander, who obtained the land of Miniet El-Asbagh
and kept it until his death. It was then bought by El-Asbagh ben Abd El-Aziz Merwan from the heirs of
El-Asbagh, and there is in Egypt no fief more ancient or better. El-'Amech reports on the authority of
Ibrahim ben El-Mohager, who had it from Mousa ben Talahat,

[PDF p. 310]

that Othman gave to Abd Allah ben Mesaoud the fief of El-Nahreïn, to Omar ben Yaser the fief of Astinia,
to Khabab the fief of Sana', to Sad ben Abou Oukas the village of Harmezam; Abd Allah ben Mesaoud and Sa'd
drew from their land the third and the quarter (the seven twelfths).

Seif ben Omar reports, on the authority of Amr ben Mohammed, who had it from 'Amer, that El-Zobeïr,
Khabab, Abd Allah ben Mesaoud, Omar ben Yaser, and Ibn Habasa received fiefs in the time of Othman, and
those who have accepted this fault are more guilty than the one who committed it: and yet it is from those
that we hold our religion. Omar ben El-Khattab gave fiefs to Talahat, Garir ben Abd Allah, and El-Rabil
ben Amr; he gave to Abou Mofraz the land of the Nile, and that too is one from whom we hold our religion.
The distribution in fief is only supererogatory and forms part of the fifth belonging to God.

Omar wrote to Othman ben Hanif this letter, which was carried by Garir ben Abd Allah El-Bagali: "Give
Garir ben Abd Allah a fief sufficient to feed him, neither too great nor too small." Othman, on receipt of
the letter, referred to Omar: "Garir has arrived to me with a letter from you prescribing me to give him a
fief for his upkeep, but I did not wish to do it before taking your orders anew." And Omar answered:
"Garir spoke true; execute then this order; but you did well to consult me a second time." He also gave a
fief to Abou Mousa El-Achari, the land of Kardous ben Hani to Aly ben Abou Taleb, and a fief to Souïd ben
Rhafiat El-Ga'fi. Here is what Seïf reports on the authority of Thabet ben Harima, who had it from Souïd
ben Rhafiat: I asked Aly for a fief, and he said to me: Write this: "Aly has given Souïd in fief a land for
his mount from such to such a period, as long as it will please God." Abou'l-Qasem El-Rahman ben Abd Allah
ben Abd El-Hakem has given the list of what was accorded in fief by Moawiah ben Abou Safian and the
caliphs who succeeded him, concerning the domains of Egypt, and he cites a great number of them.

The Ommiade and Abbaside caliphs made distributions of the lands of Egypt among the people of their
entourage, but not as is done today; the revenue of the lands of Egypt was employed by him to pay the
salary of the army as well as all the necessary works, and the surplus was carried to the treasury; what
was given in fief remained in the hands of the feudatories. But since the time of the sultan Salah el-din
Youssef ben Aioub until the present,

[PDF p. 311]

all the lands of Egypt were given in fief to the sultan, the emirs, and the army.

The land of Egypt is today divided into seven parts: (1) one part pertains to the royal divan and
subdivides itself into three sections comprising all that depends on the particular divan and what
depends on the ordinary divan; (2) another part is given in fief to the emirs and the army; the detail of
it has been reproduced in the chapter of the Cadastre of El-Naser; (3) the third part comprises the wakf
or mortmain goods, reserved for the mosques, the schools, the convents of dervishes, the establishments
of beneficence, the descendants and freedmen of those who have put their goods in mortmain; (4) the fourth
part takes the name of goods of religious reserve and comprises the lands left in the hands of people who
enjoy them either because they are employed in the upkeep of the places of prayer and the mosques, or
because they have no occupation; (5) the fifth part is composed of properties one can sell or buy or that
are transmitted by inheritance or donation, because they have been bought from the treasury; (6) the
sixth part remains unproductive because it is impossible to cultivate it; the livestock graze there and
one grows wood or other similar things there; (7) the seventh part, finally, is that which the water of
the Nile does not reach and which remains sterile; this part comprises lands that have always and at all
times been thus, and others which, cultivated primitively, have become uncultivated. All that concerns
these seven parts is related in this book, and you will find it in going through it, God willing!

Abou Abd Allah El-Qasem ben Salam, in his book Of the Taxes, in the passage where he cites the traditions
reported by Ma'mer, who had it from Abd Allah ben Taous, who had it from Taous, his father, says this: The
prophet of God said: The uncultivated land is to God and to his apostle and will revert to you one day.
"What does that mean?" I asked. "It will be," he said, "divided into fiefs." That is the origin of the
distribution of the lands. One called "abandoned, uncultivated" a land all of whose inhabitants were
extinct and which, having become uncultivated, fell back under the management of the imam; it is of this
that it is said: As for the land that the Prophet has devolved to some persons and that is still
cultivated by its inhabitants, if the imam gives it, he makes a conditional act; and to this category
belongs what was given to Tamim El-Dari, who had obtained in share

[PDF p. 312]

a land of Syria before Syria was conquered and occupied by the Muslims. The Prophet therefore gave it only
conditionally, for it was still the property of belligerents and only for the case in which the Muslims
would have been victorious; likewise for the daughter of Nafilat that the Prophet accorded to Chibani
before the conquest of Herat. The promise was kept by Khaled ben El-Oualid; as Omar ben El-Khattab fulfilled
the promise made to Tamim El-Dari when Palestine was conquered, a promise made conditionally by the
Prophet. Abou Abd Allah calls conditional fiefs those that the imam promises in advance to some combatant.

Abou-l-Hassan Aly ben Mohammed ben Habib El-Mawardi, in his Royal Politics, says that the fiefs are of two
sorts: the fiefs in usufruct and the fiefs in full property. The latter divide into dead lands and
cultivated lands. The cultivated lands comprise in their turn two categories: some depend absolutely on
their proprietor, and the sultan has not to interfere in their management, except for what concerns the
tax when they are in a country subject to Islam; if the land is situated in a country in a state of war
that the Muslims have not yet conquered, the imam, if he desires, can accord it in fief so that the
concessionary takes possession of it at the moment of the conquest; this donation is licit. It is thus
that Tamim El-Dari asked the Prophet to accord him as a fief the springs of the country of which he was a
native, and this before the conquest of Syria -- a request that was granted; likewise Abou Thalebat
El-Khasni asked him for the concession of a land still in the hands of the Greeks, and the Prophet cried:
"Do you hear what he says?" "By him who sent you to spread justice," replied Thalebat, "he will make you
conquer it." And the Prophet handed him a letter of donation. "If someone," says El-Mawardi, "asks the
imam for the cession of a domain situated in a country in a state of war and possessed by its inhabitants,
or of a part of the booty or of some slave, in order to have more rights when the country is conquered,
the gift can be validly made even though the result would be uncertain and of the domain of vague things.

El-Cha'bi recounted that Khazima ben Aous El-Taii said to the Prophet: "If God makes you conquer Herat,
accord me the daughter of Nafilat." And when Khaled wished to sign the treaty with the people of Herat,
Khazima said to him: "The prophet

[PDF p. 313]

of God has given me the daughter of Nafilat, do not include her then in the treaty." He presented as
witnesses Bichr ben Sa'd and Mohammed ben Moslimah. Khaled therefore put her outside the treaty, and she
was given to Khazima, who resold her for a thousand dinars, for she had become old and had changed much.
"You sold her cheap," one said to him; "her relatives would certainly have paid you more than double what
you asked them." "I did not think," he answered, "that there was a number superior to a thousand."
El-Mawardi sets forth that for the donations and the shares thus accorded to be valid, one must examine
the state of the conquest. If it is made by treaty, the land remains the possession of the one to whom it
was accorded and is put outside the treaty as a share priming all the others. If the conquest is made by
force, the one who asked and obtained the fief has more right over the share he asked and over the gift he
solicited than the other warriors. The warriors will be questioned, and if they had knowledge of the
promise of land or share made before the conquest, they have nothing to claim; if they were ignorant of it
until the moment of the conquest, the imam, to satisfy them, must give them something equivalent on the
booty. Abou Hanifa said: The imam is not held to satisfy them either by a fief or by a share of the booty,
if he finds it preferable to act thus.

[PDF p. 314]

CHAPTER XXXVI
OF THE DIVAN OF THE REVENUE AND OF THE TAX

The writings of the taxes are called the bureau of dispatches. The first of these divans installed under
Islam was at Damascus and in Iraq, on the model of what existed before Islam. The divan of Syria employed
the Greek language, that of Iraq Persian, and that of Egypt Coptic. The divans of these different
countries then employed Arabic. The one who changed the language employed in the divan of Egypt from
Coptic to Arabic was Abd Allah ben Abd El-Melek ben Merwan, emir of Egypt, under the caliphate of
El-Oualid ben Abd El-Melek, in the year 87 [23 December 705 to 11 December 706]; this emir had all the
writings drawn up in Arabic, dismissed Antanach from the divan, and replaced him with Ibn Yarbou'
El-Fazari of the town of Homs. The one who first changed the language of the divan (of Iraq) from Persian
to Arabic was El-Oualid ben Hecham ben Makhzoum ben Soliman ben Zakouan, who died in 122 [text
erroneously reads 222]. The most widespread opinion is that this change was made by Salah ben Abd
El-Rahman, secretary of El-Haggag; he was a freedman of the Beni S'ad who was then at the head of the
divans of Iraq after the year 80 [9 March 699 to 25 February 700]. Here is, it is said, the cause of this
change: Saleh ben Abd El-Rahman had for father a slave carried off in the Sagestan; he was very skillful
in writing, and being an employee of Zadan Farrouch, secretary of El-Haggag ben Youssef El-Thafqi, he
traced for the latter specimens of Arabic and Persian writing, which was very agreeable to the heart of
El-Haggag. But Saleh, who feared Zadan, said to him: "It is you who have made me rise in grade and made me
approach the emir. I see that I am agreeable to him, and I fear he may make me rise above you and that
your rank may be lowered." "Believe nothing of it," answered Zadan; "he has more need of

[PDF p. 315]

me than I have need of him, for he will find no other than me to satisfy him for the reckoning." "By
God!" said Saleh, "if I wished to put the accounts in Arabic, I would do it easily." "Make some lines of
it, then, and show them to me," said Zadan. And Saleh having done it: "Feign to be ill," said Zadan to
him. Saleh pretended to be ill, and El-Haggag sent him his physician, which was very painful to Zadan, who
prescribed Saleh to appear no more before El-Haggag. But, a short time after, broke out the revolt of Abd
El-Rahman ben Mohammed ben El-Ach'ath, during which Zadan was killed at the moment he was leaving a house
to return home. El-Haggag then took for secretary Saleh, who taught him all that had passed between him
and Zadan on the subject of the divan. El-Haggag, marveled, ordered him to put that into practice and
replaced the Persian language with Arabic. This appeared very hard to the Persians, who offered Saleh a
hundred thousand dirhems not to effect the change. He refused, and Merwan Chah ben Zadan Farrouch said to
him: "May God make your trace disappear from the world as you have made the trace of the Persian language
disappear!" Abd El-Hamid ben Yahia said: "What a man is this Saleh, and what a service he rendered to the
accountants!"

As for the divan of Syria, the one who replaced the Greek with Arabic there was Abou Thabet Soliman ben
Sa'd, the secretary of correspondence. There is no agreement on the period when this change took place.
According to some, it would be under the caliphate of Abd El-Melek ben Merwan, but according to others, it
would be in the time of the caliph Hecham ben Abd El-Melek. The author who occupied himself with the divan
of Syria is the Christian Sargoun ben Mansour, in the time of Moawiah ben Abou Safian; after him, his son
Mansour ben Sargoun occupied himself with it equally.

[PDF p. 316]

CHAPTER XXXVII
OF THE REVENUES OF EGYPT UNDER ISLAM

The first who, in the time of Islam, collected taxes in Egypt was Amr ben El-As, who took in 12,000,000
dinars constituted by the tax of 2 dinars with which each man was struck. After him, Abd Allah ben Sa'd
ben Abou Sarh collected for one year of taxes in Egypt 14,000,000 dinars; it is on this subject that
Othman ben 'Afan said to Amr ben El-As: "O Abou Abd Allah, the she-camel has the udders more swollen than
before." "But you will harm its young one," answered Amr. The sums collected by Amr ben El-As comprised
only the capitation and not the tax properly speaking. After these two emirs, the revenue of Egypt went
diminishing as a consequence of the corruption brought on by time, the increasing devastation that
invaded the greater part of the lands, and the appearance of wars. The Ommiades and the Abbaside caliphs
did not even manage to collect 3,000,000 dinars; one must except the time of Hecham ben Abd El-Melek, who
had recommended to Obeïd Allah ben El-Habhab, governor of Egypt, to apply himself to rendering this
country prosperous. Since the lowering of the revenue of Egypt, one cites scarcely more than two fine
receipts: the first under the caliphate of Hecham ben Abd El-Melek; Obeïd Allah ben El-Habhab, who was in
charge of the finances, went himself to attend the survey of the cultivated terrains of Egypt and the
lands which, being able to be watered by the Nile, nevertheless remain uncultivated; he found that the
ensemble gave thirty million feddans without counting the high lands and the terrains in bad state; the
whole was cadastred and organized as best as possible. Under the administration of Obeïd Allah, Egypt
yielded 4,000,000 dinars, despite the low price of provisions and although the country had neither octroi
nor impositions. In the year 107 [19 May 725 to 7 May 726], in the first days of the reign of Hecham ben
Abd El-Melek, Ibn El-Habhab

[PDF p. 317]

divided Egypt into well-defined categories that were inscribed at the divans, which was maintained until
the disappearance of the Ommiades. The sum collected reached 1,700,837 dinars, of which 1,000,420 and a
half dinars for the Said, and the rest for the nomes of Lower Egypt. It is said that Ousamah ben Zeïd
collected, under the caliphate of Soliman ben Abd El-Melek, the sum of 12,000,000 dinars.

The second fine receipt was made under the emirate of Ahmed ben Touloun, who received Egypt from the hands
of Ahmed ben Modabber; at that period Egypt had fallen into such a state of ruin that the revenues
scarcely reached 800,000 dinars. Ahmed ben Touloun applied himself as best he could to cultivation, and
Egypt yielded, thanks to him, 4,300,000 dinars. His son, the emir Abou-l-Geich Khamarouyah ben Ahmed,
collected 4,000,000 dinars, despite the low price of provisions; one sold sometimes, in the time of the
Toulounides, ten ardebs of wheat for one dinar.

Ibn Khordadabah reports that the revenue of Egypt, in the time of Pharaoh, amounted to 96,000,000 dinars,
and that Ibn Habhab collected 2,723,839 dinars; in which he is mistaken, for this last sum represents only
what was paid into the treasury of Damascus after the payment of the salaries and the necessary expenses
in Egypt. Mousa ben Eïsa El-Hachemi paid 2,180,000 dinars, after payment of the expenses and all the
costs.

When the Nile reaches seventeen cubits and ten fingers, the revenue of Egypt is 4,257,000 dinars. The
imposition was 2 dinars per feddan under the caliphate of Al-Mamoun and his successors. In the time of the
emir Abou Bekr Mohammed ben Tafag El-Akhchid, the revenue of Egypt was 2,000,000 dinars, without speaking
of the hamlets that were property of the emir. El-Akhchid was the first to remodel the salaries in Egypt;
his secretary Ibn Kala had drawn up a statement in which the expenses exceeded the receipts by 200,000
dinars. "How will we do?" asked El-Akhchid. "Take from the salaries and the wages," said Ibn Kala; "those
people are no more interesting than necessary." "Tomorrow," said El-Akhchid, "come to me and we will
arrange that." And Ibn Kala having arrived the next day, El-Akhchid said to him: "I have reflected on what
you told me, but the salaried people are either poor devils, or people of small fortune, or rich people. I
can take this diminution only from

[PDF p. 318]

you." "God be glorified," said Ibn Kala. "Glorify him," said El-Akhchid, and he gave him no respite until
he had obtained from him a paper by which he recognized himself debtor of the sum. And as one reproached
him this action, he said: Listen to what this man did: Ahmed ben Mohammed ben El-Mardani went to him one
day and said to him: "There is nothing between me and El-Akhchid, and he can do nothing against me. Here
are ten thousand dinars for El-Akhchid and a thousand dinars for you." Ibn Kala then came to me and said:
"Here are a thousand dinars that come to you carried on the water." And he gave me a thousand dinars,
keeping for himself the ten thousand. Another time Mohammed ben Aly El-Mardani sent me twenty thousand
dinars through Ibn Kala, and as I found the sum a little small, one day when I met El-Mardani, I addressed
reproaches to him, and he said to me: "I sent you a hundred thousand dinars and handed twenty thousand of
them to Ibn Kala." The latter had kept the hundred thousand dinars and brought me the twenty thousand. I
repeated to him what Mohammed ben Aly had told me. "What foolishness," he cried; "I kept the hundred
thousand dinars for you for the moment when you would need them. Take them, if you wish, but I know you
will squander them."

The sum of the salaries, in the time of Kafour El-Akhchidi, reached per year 500,000 dinars that were
paid to rich people, to people of medium fortune, and to all sorts of people among whom was no one of the
army, nor of the servants of the court, nor of the employees of the provinces. Aly ben Saleh
El-Rouzabadi, secretary of Kafour, adroitly made him understand that it would be good to make economies on
the sum of the salaries, by diminishing the salary of the people. At that very moment (he was seated and
working), his forehead itched; he scratched it with his pen; but the itching increased to such a point
that he had to abandon his work and withdraw. He was treated by the (hot) iron, and he died in the month
of Ramadan of the year 387 [7 September to 6 October 997]. Here is an example given by God to those who
intervene maliciously in the affairs of the people. For God has said: "The ruses of the wicked always
fall back on their author."

At the death of Kafour, numerous and terrible calamities fell upon [...]

[PDF p. 319]

Egypt: dearth, plague, seditions. And the revenues of the country went always decreasing until the
arrival of Gouher, come from the Maghreb at the head of the army of his master El-Moezz li-din Allah Abou
Tamim Moadd. Gouher took in as revenues of the year 358 [25 November 968 to 13 November 969] 3,400,000 and
some dinars. The vizier El-Naser li'l-din Abou-l-Hossein Abd El-Rahman El-Yazouri, vizier of Egypt under
the caliphate of El-Mostanser billah ben El-Zaheïr, received the order to draw up a statement of the
receipts and expenses of the empire. The chiefs of each divan made the count of their receipts and
expenses and handed the whole to the director of the divan of the council, which is the supreme divan.
The latter made of the whole an overall work that he carried to the vizier. The vizier ascertained that
the receipts rose to 2,000,000 dinars, of which a million for Syria, with the expenses opposite the
receipts, and 1,000,000 dinars for Egypt and the rest of the empire.

The cadi Abou-l-Hassan, in his book entitled Instructions for the Science of the Tax, says: I have
examined the tables drawn up for the general Badr El-Gemali, at the time of his arrival in Egypt in the
time of Mostanser, when he seized the country and triumphed over the corrupt who were there; these tables
present the state of the receipts of the year 483 [text: lunar and budgetary]; these receipts were
composed, according to the custom established by the divan and current in the provinces of Egypt, of the
tax and what pertains to it, of the lease-farms, concessions, and other chapters, including the free
domains of Cairo, of Masr and their suburbs, the two eastern and western provinces of the Delta and their
districts, Tannis, Damietta with their territory, Alexandria, the Behera, the provinces of the Upper and
Lower Said, the Oases, and Eïdab for the budgetary year, according to the Egyptian custom, as well as the
provinces of Syria that begin at the limit of the two trees, where begins the province of Palestine and
of Tripoli; and for this year 478 budgetary, including what had been fixed, in gold the receipt was
3,100,000 dinars; now, what had been fixed represented the total of the revenue collected in the year 466
[6 September 1073 to 26 August 1074] lunar before the arrival of Emir El-Giouch, a year corresponding to
the year 463 budgetary; the sum of it was 2,800,000 dinars; which shows for the year of El-Giouch an
excess of 300,000 dinars,

[PDF p. 320]

a fact that proves that the cultivation was flourishing and the justice general. This table was drawn up
in 483.

Ibn Miser reports that El-Afdal Ibn Émir El-Giouch ordered a statement to be made of the receipts of the
provinces of Egypt and that the sum rose to 5,000,000 dinars.

The cadi El-Fadl, in his Journal, says that the revenue of Egypt, from Alexandria to Eïdab, without taking
account of the frontier posts and the various chapters of revenue of the divan, no more than a great
number of provinces, rose for the year 585 [19 February 1189 to 7 February 1190] to 4,653,029 dinars.
Subsequently, the yield fell, and whereas the cadi El-Mouafeq Abou-l-Karam ben Ma'soum El-Asemi El-Tabisi
had collected, in gold only, for the treasury, expenses and costs paid, 1,200,000 dinars at the end of the
year 540 [24 June 1145 to 12 June 1146], after him and until the fall of the Fatimids, no one collected
such a sum any more.

The cause of the lowering of the revenues of Egypt -- which, in the last year of the Greek occupation,
before the conquest of the country by the Muslims, had reached 20,000,000 dinars -- is that the kings
scarcely worried about making expenses for the cultivation of the country, cultivation that requires a
quarter and even a third of what it yields. To finish with all that relates to the state of the land of
Egypt, let us say that it has been ascertained that the duration of cultivation is sixty days and that
the surface of the lands is 180,000,000 feddans, of which, according to Ibn Modabber, 24,000,000 are
cultivated; that, to produce the tax, 480,000 plowmen are needed, held to work ceaselessly. If this number
of workers is maintained, the prosperity of the country is complete and the revenue reaches its maximum.
But, in the final analysis, there are found there only 120,000 cultivators, of whom 70,000 for the Said
and 50,000 for the Delta. Today all that was practiced formerly has been changed, and the situation of the
country has become altogether precarious.

[PDF p. 321]

CHAPTER XXXVIII
OF THE DIFFERENT LANDS OF EGYPT AND OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE CULTIVATIONS

The lands of Egypt are classified into numerous categories. Those whose value is the highest, whose price
is the most elevated, and whose importance is the most considerable are the baq lands. One thus calls the
lands cultivated the previous year in leeks and cucurbits (gourds), which renders them altogether
favorable to the cultivation of wheat.

After the baq terrains come the charaqi lands: these lands have been left for a year without cultivation
and are put back into production only after the inundation of the second year; the harvests from them are
excellent.

The baraïb lands are those that, the previous year, bore wheat or barley. They are of lesser value than
the baq terrains because of the weakening of the land that results from these cultivations. Thus the
harvests produced by the lands that previously bore these two sorts of cereals are less good than those of
the baq terrains. The baraïb terrains are proper for the cultivation of leeks, cotton, and cucurbits, a
cultivation that rests the land and permits it to become in its turn a baq terrain.

The saqmahiah lands are those where, the previous year, flax was cultivated; the wheat produced by these
lands is of bad quality.

The chetouniah lands are those that have been irrigated and left fallow; they are inferior to the charaqi
lands.

The salaïh lands are those that have been irrigated and left fallow, then plowed and left again without
cultivation; they are similar to the charaqi lands and give excellent harvests.

The naqa lands are the lands absolutely free of all cultivation and where nothing opposes the sowing of
anything whatever.

One calls ouasekh (dirty, impure) a land whose impurity is such

[PDF p. 322]

that it is impossible for the cultivators to remove the filth from it; if one plows this land and sows it,
the harvests come up there mixed with alfa and other similar herbs.

One calls ghaleb every land where the grass is so abundant that one can cultivate nothing there; one makes
pastures of them.

One calls khers the lands bastardized by the abundance of matters that oppose cultivation; one makes
pastures of them likewise, but these lands are inferior to the ouasekh and ghaleb terrains. However, if
one tears out all that is contrary to cultivation, these lands become good.

One calls charaqi the terrains where the water does not arrive, either because the Nile is too low, or
because the land is too elevated, or because the water-conduits are obstructed, etc.

One calls moustabhar every low land where the water arrives and, not finding an outlet, stays on the soil
until the moment of cultivation is past.

One calls sabakh every land where salt dominates. The salty land cannot be used for the cultivation of
grains. In parts where the salt is less abundant, one can sometimes cultivate something other than
cereals -- asparagus, for example, or eggplants; one also cultivates the Persian reed there.

A condition of the most important for the cultivation of the lands of Egypt is the good state of the
dikes. The dikes are of two sorts: the royal dikes and the local dikes. The royal dikes are of general
utility, conserving the water of the Nile for the whole country until the moment when it is used. There
are on their subject special regulations in force in the provinces of the east and the west; they were
formerly maintained at the expense of the provinces, and the tenants were charged with this care, and the
expenses effected by them on this account were deducted from their dues as land tax. Later, money was
levied for this purpose in each province. The money was confided to the employees of the divan, who made
the necessary expenses and paid the surplus of the money into the treasury. They were subsequently
charged to the principal emirs of the kingdom, a state of things that lasted until the time of El-Naser
Farag. The latter levied considerable sums without spending anything of them on the upkeep of the dikes;
he kept the money for himself and made largesses of it to the lords. The upkeep of the dikes fell to the
inhabitants, and the situation only worsened and reached the point that you will be able to see, God
willing,

[PDF p. 323]

in the part of this book that treats of the causes of the ruin of Egypt. The local dikes are of a
particular utility, restricted to one province and not to another. The tenants and the cultivators are
held to maintain them with the money gathered in each province. The royal dikes are therefore like the
walls of a town to whose upkeep the sultan must attend, a care that is spared his subjects; the local
dikes are like the houses built inside the walls -- the master of each house must repair it and keep it in
good state. The custom is that, if a tenant is displaced after having made some expense for the upkeep or
repair of a dike in the year when his domain is withdrawn from him, he has the right to exact from the
tenant who succeeds him the reimbursement of a sum equal to that he spent while he was in exercise, to
assure the prosperous yield of a year when another than he will harvest.

The best WHEAT is cultivated in the baq and charaqi terrains; in the Said one cultivates wheat after wheat
because of the prodigious fertility of the soil; one also cultivates it there sometimes after flax and
barley. One sows the wheat, from the middle of Babah to the end of Hathor, in the elevated terrains that
uncover early. For the low-lying terrains that keep the water very late, one prolongs the time of sowing
until the end of Khiak. The quantity of seed necessary for a feddan varies according to the strength or
weakness of the soil, according to the greater or lesser thickness of the layer of humus, and according
to whether one cultivates by light plowing or deep. This quantity may go up to an ardeb or reach only 5 or
even 4 oueïbas. One even finds in the Said lands still less demanding, and in the Houf Ramsis terrains
where no more than 2 oueïbas of seed per feddan are needed. The wheat is ripe in Egypt in the month of
Bachons, which corresponds to Nisan. The harvest per feddan varies, according to the lands, from 2 to 20
ardebs. Abou Bekr ben Ouahchiat says, in his book Of Agriculture: "It is asserted that the harvest of
Egypt yields 300 meds for one med (there are 22 or 24 meds in the oueïba); this is due to the heat of the
air of this country, to the unctuous and fatty state of the soil, and to the quantity of silt [...]

[PDF p. 324]

held in suspension in the water of the Nile." In 806 [21 July 1403 to 11 July 1404], the water withdrew
from a part of the lake of the Fayoum, named today Bahr Youssef; this terrain was put under cultivation
and marvelous harvests were obtained, reaching per feddan 91 ardebs of barley, according to the measure of
the Fayoum where the ardeb contains 9 oueïbas. In the time of the Fatimids, some domains of the Said
produced 3 ardebs per feddan. And at the cadastre of 572 [10 July 1176 to 29 June 1177], the tax was fixed
at 2 and a half ardebs per feddan, then no more than 2 ardebs were levied. As for the terrains of the
Delta, the tax was collected in money and not in grain.

One cultivates BARLEY in a terrain previously sown in wheat or something similar; this cultivation is done
in a low terrain still humid. One sows the barley a few days before the wheat and harvests it likewise a
few days before it. The quantity of seed necessary varies with the terrain, but it is greater than that
required by wheat. Barley ripens in Barmoudah, which corresponds to Adar.

The cultivation of the BEAN is done, after plowing, in the baraïb terrains, from the beginning of Babah.
One eats the green beans in the month of Khiak; 3 oueïbas or thereabouts of seed are needed per feddan.
The bean is ripe in Barmoudah and yields per feddan at least 20 ardebs.

One sows LENTILS and CHICKPEAS from Hathor to Khiak; as for the CHICKLING-VETCH (gesse), one sows it only
in the lightest terrains, after plowing, choosing preferably the elevated lands; one cultivates it by
light plowing in the free lands. Each feddan requires, as seed, from an ardeb to 8 oueïbas of chickpeas,
from an ardeb to 4 oueïbas of vetch, and at least one oueïba of lentils; these grains ripen in Barmoudah
and yield per feddan: the chickpeas from 4 to 10 ardebs, the vetch at least 10 ardebs, and the lentils at
most 20 ardebs.

The best FLAX is cultivated in terrains lightly plowed and fertilized with sebakh. When the flax, having
become tall, has lodged (fallen over), one pulls it up by stalks. It is then named aslaf (that which is
advanced); one spreads it on the spot to dry it, and as soon as it is dry, one carries it off, retts it,
and empties the pods, from which

[PDF p. 325]

is drawn the flaxseed that produces the oil of har; one sows the flax in the month of Hathor; and each
feddan requires at least an ardeb and a half of seed. It ripens in Barmoudah and yields per feddan at
least 30 bales of textile matter and at most 6 ardebs of seeds. The tax of the flax lands amounted
formerly to 3 and even 5 dinars in the Said, to 13 dinars at Dallas, and to 3 dinars in the other regions.

One cultivates LEEKS when the water of the Nile begins to fall; this cultivation must be finished before
the appearance of the south wind named merisi; the first leeks are cultivated in the month of Babah,
sometimes after the Nourouz; for the cultivations in plowed land, one delays the sowing until Khiak and
Tobe, sometimes even until Hathor. The quantity of seed necessary is 2 and a half oueïbas per feddan. The
green leek is good to harvest at the end of Khiak; those sown in plowed land come to maturity in Tobe and
Amchir; the yield in plowed land is from 4 oueïbas to 2 ardebs per feddan.

One sows the ONION and the GARLIC from the month of Hathor until the middle of Khiak; one needs per feddan
half a quarter of an oueïba of onion seed and from 100 to 150 cloves of garlic; the garlic is ripe in
Barmoudah, and the onion set apart for the next sowing is cultivated from the beginning of Khiak to the
10th of Tobe; it yields per feddan 10 ardebs and ripens in Bachons.

One sows the LUPIN in Tobe; each feddan requires an ardeb of seed; it ripens in Barmoudah and yields per
feddan at most 20 ardebs.

Such are the winter cultivations.

As for the summer cultivations:

The WATERMELON and the BEAN (haricot) are sown from the middle of Barmahat to the middle of Barmoudah. 2
qadahs of seeds are needed per feddan; they ripen in Bachons.

One sows SESAME in Barmoudah; a quarter of an oueïba of seed is needed per feddan; it ripens in Abib and
Mesori and yields per feddan from 1 to 6 ardebs.

One sows COTTON in Barmoudah; each feddan requires for the seed 4 oueïbas of seeds; it ripens in Thot and
yields per feddan at most 8 geraoui qantars.

One plants SUGARCANE from the middle of Barmahat in the baq and berch terrains; the land is plowed seven
times, and it is recommended to have executed the first three plowings before the end of Bachons; the
quantity of terrain

[PDF p. 326]

occupied by the plantation is one eighth of a feddan (per feddan) or thereabouts. The cane requires a land
of good quality, well manured, of easy irrigation, and over which the Nile can spread at the moment of the
inundation. One tears out from the terrain all the alfa found there, one cleans it, then one passes the
berch (which is a sort of great plow) over it six times, one levels the soil by means of the harrow, after
which one plows six other times with the berch, one passes the harrow again, and one passes the plow over
it six more times, then the harrow (the word berch means "to plow"). The land being well prepared and in
good conditions, after the harrow has well spread and pulverized it, one pricks it with the spade and
introduces into each hole two pieces of cane, one simple and one double; one must have previously divided
the terrain into small squares and dug channels that are to bring the water to these squares. The length
of each piece of cane is three complete stalks with a piece of the upper stalk and the lower stalk
[footnote: that is, each planted piece comprises three entire articulations, the section being made above
the upper node and below the lower node; in other words each piece comprises four entire nodes]; for this
one chooses the canes whose stalks are short and the nodes very tight; one calls this operation the
"planting." When the planting is finished, one spreads earth over it; it is clear that in this operation
one must lay the pieces horizontally and not stick them vertically. From this moment until the beginning
of spring one waters once every seven days. The cane having grown, when the leaves begin to appear, there
also comes out of the earth alfa and purslane which, among the Egyptians, is named reglat. One then weeds
the land where the canes are planted (the word means "cleaning of the terrains planted in canes," an
operation that consists in ridding it of all that has grown at the same time as the cane), and one
continues ceaselessly to weed until the cane has become vigorous, resistant, and thick. One says at that
moment that the cane has driven out the weeding-tool; for it is then no longer possible to weed it, which
was not the case as long as the stalk had not come out. The total of the waterings one can give the canes
amounts to twenty-eight; these waterings are done by means of noriahs (waterwheels); habitually,
[footnote about node count] supposing the canes planted in terrains low enough to be covered by the
inundation and not far from the river, a noriah set in movement by vigorous oxen, although the waters are
near the surface of the soil, can irrigate (in a day?) eight feddans of

[PDF p. 327]

land; in this case eight oxen are needed. But if the wells are at a certain distance from the Nile, it is
no longer possible to irrigate more than six feddans, and sometimes only four. When the Nile swells and
rises, the canes are then fit to receive the full water. Here is how one proceeds: one makes an opening in
one of the sides of the dike that surrounds the plantation to guard it from the invasion of the waters at
the moment of the flood; by this breach one lets penetrate the water that spreads over the canes; when
this water has reached the height of a span, one stops up the opening made in the dike, in order to
prevent the water from penetrating further; and one lets the water spread over the canes stay there for
two or three hours, so that the land is well impregnated; at the end of this time one makes the water flow
off by another opening, and when it is altogether withdrawn, one brings new water in the same way. The
operation we have just indicated is repeated several times, on days spaced by a determined quantity. Then
one weans the land. If one puts into practice all that we have just indicated, the cane has all it can
require; but if one departs from it, the result is disastrous. One must also, before the cane becomes
sweet, sprinkle it (?) with tar, so that it is not eaten by the worms. The cane is cut in Khiak; one burns
the part still adhering to the soil, one waters it, one weeds it as we said above, and new canes grow that
one calls the successors (khalifes), the first being named chiefs. The sugar of the second canes is much
better than that of the first. The latter are ripe in Tobe; the others in the middle of Hathor. The
extreme period when one can put the cane to the press is the Nourouz. It yields per feddan from forty to
eighty ablouga of sugar. The ablouga is a sort of vessel containing nine qantars or thereabouts.

One sows the COLOCASIA at the same time as the cane; each feddan yields ten geraoui qantars of colocasia;
it ripens in Hathor.

One sows the EGGPLANT in Barmahat, Barmoudah, Bachons, and Baouna; it ripens from Baouna to Mesori.

[PDF p. 328]

One sows INDIGO from Bachons; one oueïba of seed is needed per feddan; it ripens in Abib.

One sows RADISHES all year long; from one to two qadah of seed are needed per feddan.

One sows TURNIPS in Abib; one qadah of seed is needed per feddan; they ripen after forty days.

One transplants LETTUCE by rootlets in Tobe and eats it two months after.

One transplants CABBAGES by rootlets in Tout; they ripen in Hathor.

One plants the VINE in Amchir (that is) one moves it and transplants it.

One plants the FIG TREE and the APPLE TREE in Amchir.

One prunes the MULBERRY TREES in Amchir.

One plants and moistens the ALMOND TREES, the PEACH TREES, and the APRICOT TREES with the water of Tobe
for three days while they are stalks, then one plants them and transplants them when they are shrubs in
the month of Tobe.

One sows the DATE stone, then one moves it when the shrub is still very small and transplants it.

One buries the bulb of the NARCISSUS in Mesori.

One sows the JASMINE during the Nasi (intercalary days) and the month of Amchir.

One plants the MYRTLE by cuttings in Tobe and Amchir.

One sows the BASIL in Barmoudah.

One sows the seed of the GILLYFLOWER (wallflower) when the Nile rises.

One plants the winter BANANA in Tobe and the summer one in Amchir.

One transplants the CASSIA TREE in Barmahat.

One prunes the VINE at the time of the north wind until the first days of Barmahat to make the buds come
out.

One prunes the trees in Tobe and Amchir, with the exception of the sedr (jujube), which is the tree that
produces the nabq and which is pruned in Barmoudah.

One waters the trees once in Tobe (the water of Tobe is called "water of life"), once in Amchir when the
flowers appear, twice in Barmahat when the fruit forms, and three times in Bachons; one waters them once a
week during the months of Baouna, Abib, and Mesori; and only once during the months of Toub and Baba,
saturating them with water of the Nile; one [...]
waters again with the water of the Nile in Hathor, flooding the low stalks. In Hathor one waters only once
with great water the vines not yet irrigated.

All the lands of Egypt are measured by the feddan (about 4,000 square meters); the feddan is equivalent to
a surface measuring 400 hakemi qassabats in length by 1 qassabat in width; the qassabat is worth ten and
two-thirds cubits of those used to measure cloth, and about five of the cubits of the carpenter. The cadi
Abou-l-Hassan, in his book The Instructions, says that the tax of Egypt was established by the qassabat,
the usual measure. It is according to this measure that the agriculturists estimate the lands. The surface
value of the feddan is 400 qassabats, for it represents a square of 20 qassabats on a side. The qassabat
of surveying bears the name hakemi and is worth about 5 cubits of the carpenter.

[PDF p. 330]

CHAPTER XXXIX
CLASSIFICATION OF THE REVENUES OF EGYPT

The revenues of Egypt form at present two categories: one named kharagi, and the other hilali. The kharagi
tax comprises all that is levied annually on the lands cultivated in grains, palms, vines, fruits, and
what is collected from the cultivators, as dues -- sheep, chickens, cakes, and other products of the
countryside. The hilali tax consists in a multitude of rights established one after another by unjust
governors. Here is the origin of these impositions under Islam: the Commander of the Faithful, Omar ben
El-Khattab, having learned that Muslim merchants, on their passage over terrains belonging to the army,
had been imposed by the latter with the tithe, wrote to Abou Mousa El-Ach'ari, governor of Basra: "From
every Muslim merchant who passes through the province take 5 dirhems for 200 dirhems; from every merchant
having treated with Islam -- that is, submitted to our protection -- take 1 dirhem per 20 dirhems, and
from every merchant belonging to a country at war with us, take 1 dirhem for 10 dirhems." One said one day
to the son of Omar: "Omar levied the tenth on the Muslims." He answered: "No!" Omar ben Abd El-Aziz
abolished this right and wrote: "Discharge the people of these rights; for these are not rights but
exactions."

It is recounted that Omar ben El-Khattab received one day the visit of Syrians who said to him: "We have
found mounts and money; levy on this the alms so that we may be purified." "How," said Omar, "would I do
what our predecessors have not done?" and he asked counsel. Aly ben Abou Taleb said to him: "There is no
harm in this if your successors do not do it," and Omar took per head of slave 10 dirhems and as much per
horse; as for the dromedaries, he collected per head 8 dirhems, and 5 dirhems per mule.

The first who, in the time of Islam, struck the shops with a tax

[PDF p. 331]

was the Commander of the Faithful Abou Abd Allah Mohammed ben Abou Ga'far El-Mansour, in the year 167 [5
August 783 to 23 July 784], and the one charged with the collection was Saïd El-Garati.

The first who, in Egypt, collected money outside the kharagi tax was Ahmed ben Mohammed ben Moudabber,
intendant of the revenues of Egypt after the year 250 [13 February 864 to 1 February 865]; he was the most
wicked of men and the most diabolical accountant. He invented all sorts of vexations that only increased
after him, far from diminishing. He had the natron guarded and appropriated the revenue of it, although
formerly the natron remained at the disposal of all. He put on the pastures where the livestock grazed a
tax named "right of pasturage." On the products of the waters that God gives as nourishment to everyone he
established the "right of fishing," and many others still. It was then that the revenues of Egypt were
classified into kharagi and hilali. Under Ahmed and his successors, the hilali tax was given the names of
"assistance" and "aid." When the emir Abou-l-Abbas Ahmed ben Touloun became governor of Egypt, the
Commander of the Faithful El-Mo'tamed 'ala Allah having attributed to him in addition the direction of the
tax and the shares of Syria, he abandoned and suppressed the rights of aid and assistance and proclaimed
the abolition of them throughout the extent of his government. The sum produced by these taxes rose each
year to 100,000 dinars. There are on this subject many accounts, of which the most important specimens are
related in the chapter of this book that treats of "the mosque of Touloun." The hilali were reestablished
in the time of the Fatimid dynasty, then in its decline, under the name of "customs duties." When the
sultan El-Naser Salah el-Din Abou-l-Mazfar Youssef ben Ayoub seized the kingdom of Egypt, he had the
customs duties of Masr and Cairo abolished, and the cadi El-Fadel wrote for him a regulation on this
subject. The annual sum (produced by these taxes) rose to 100,000 dinars, of which here is the detail:

[Dinars]
Rights on spices and all that pertains to them: 33,364
Rights on merchandise, caravans, and all that pertains to them: 9,350
Levy of El-Sana'at for the acquittal of the rights established on

[PDF p. 332]

what is received there in silk, copper, tin, coral, and precious objects: 5,193
Right of manufacture at Masr: 6,054
Right of brokerage on dry dates: 100
Right of warehousing at the landing-stage, in addition to the right on the merchandise: 818
Right of warehousing of sugar: 3,108
Right on long woods and salt: 676
Rights on boxes manufactured at Belbeïs and on the bouri fish: 100
Right of inspection at El-Sana'at, on spices and other objects: 217
Right of tent at Erment levied on all that arrives: 67
Right of warehousing of cotton: 1,000
Market of sheep at Cairo and at Masr, right of brokerage and passage of sheep at Gizeh: 3,311
Passage of sheep, flax, and oxen at the gate of the bridge: 1,100
Right on raw flax arriving at El-Sana'at: 100
Right on cereals such as the grains arriving at El-Sana'at, at the customs, at the landing-stage, at the
dike, and at the two straw-granaries, at the customs post of the Island of Gold at Tamouah and Monbar
El-Darag: 6,000
Right on the sheep arriving at El-Sana'at: 36
Right on the sheep in transit: 12
Right of parking and of sarasnaoua (?) at Gizeh and right on the sheep: 190
Collection of the Fayoum on the flax arriving there from the south and on the merchandise leaving it,
etc.: 4,160
Right on the paper sent to El-Sana'at and right of inspection: 100
Disembarkation of cereals and foodstuffs and office costs: 768
Magazine of fruits and fresh vegetables at Masr and warehousing at Cairo: 1,700

[PDF p. 333]

[Dinars]
Right of Ibn El-Meligi: 100
Magazine of cheese: 1,000
Guarding of the magazines: 240
Right on ornaments coming from the north and on cotton: 1,020
Right of brokerage on stones: 1,100
Collection of the Said: 161
Stamping of fine flax and of brocade: 1,500
Right on wool: 100
Half (0/0?) for what arrives at the Meqs: 14
Bench of the brokers: 350
Collection of the Director at El-Sana'at, and loading of spices and merchandise: 216
Right on alfa coming from the south: 135
Heating wood, lighting (?), and food at the magazine of fruits, station of the south at the two granaries
and at the dike: 35
Right on stones and homra (mortar) and right of the magazine of flax: 60
Guarding of grains at the Meqs, magazine of cheese: 140
Alfa arriving by the dike and the ford of the Meqias: 100
Right of the fifth on vases, at Gizeh: 20
Declaration of the tariff at El-Sana'at: 28
Collection of grains at the ford of the Island of Gold: 10
Right of pigeons at the grain-quay: 534
Right on henna arriving by land: 800
Right on alfa and sugarcane: 63
Right on merchandise arriving at Minieh: 184
Slaughterhouse of Chatnouf and of El-Baraniat: 200
Market of the sugar-makers: 50
Right of tent of El-Hamali on the boulevard and market of Ouardan: 19
Arrival of charcoal at Cairo: 10
Ford of the dike at Gizeh: 120
Tent of El-Baqari: 40
Tent of the house of the Tannery: 19

[PDF p. 334]

[Dinars]
Brokerage of the plaster of El-Giouchi (from the Moqattam): 112
Magazine of essences, and presses of oil and vinegar at Cairo: 500
Acid vinegar and what pertains to it: 100
Houses and benches of the (women) spinners: 110
Slaughter of oxen: 1,000
Market of fish at Cairo and at Masr: 1,100
Right of crying (auction): 100
Brokerage of flax: 100
Right of protection at the two Sana'at: 400
Enclosure of honey: 22
Fords of the Island of Gold and other localities: 300
Stamping of wax at Cairo: 87
Enclosure of the butchery animals: 700
Ford of the Meqias and of Embabeh: 100
Loading of turnips: 330
Bench of the tanners: 800
Market of slaves: 500
Manufactory of El-Tabari: 240
Market of Manboubah (?): 164
Slaughter of sheep at Gizeh and quay-right levied on the wood of sont (acacia): 10
Mat of fish: 5
Roasting oven: 100
Half-tax on molasses: 135
Market of sheep at Cairo and at Masr: 400
Market of camels: 250
Weighing of henna: 30
Right on pieces of leather: 36
Collection of cloth at El-Chachiin: 33
Right on the looms: 40
Houses of chickens: 30
Rights on horsehair and on the hoops of wood: 4

[PDF p. 335]

[Dinars]
Rights on dyeing and silk: 334
Weighing of children: 140
Manufactory of mezr beer: 84
Potteries at Masr and at Cairo: 236

Ibn Abou Taï reports that the total amount of the sums owed for the taxes and that were remitted by the
sultan Salah el-Din rose, including the arrears, up to and including the year 564 [5 October 1168 to 24
September 1169], to more than a million dirhems and two million ardebs of provisions, a sum he graciously
remitted, having them struck (from the registers) of the divan and discharging the taxpayers. But when the
sultan El-Malek El-Aziz Othman ben Salah el-Din Youssef took the government, he reestablished these rights
and increased their iniquity still. The cadi El-Fadel, in his Chronicle of the year 590, says: In the
month of Chaban [21 July to 19 August 1194], the inhabitants of Masr and Cairo displayed in broad
daylight their turpitudes, mocking the reprobation they might raise. The people of the government and the
representatives of authority let it happen, and everything became so corrupt that the grapes reached
considerable prices, so great was the quantity of people who put them to the press; a mill in the
Mahmoudieh street was specially constructed for the milling of the grain used to make beer, with no other
destination than that. The houses where this beer was sold were favored while being struck with a heavy
due; some of them yielded per day up to 16 dinars. It was forbidden to make beer in private houses in
order to favor the sale done in the protected houses. Vessels of wine were brought publicly into the
markets and without the least dissimulation. But the vengeance of God manifested itself by the unexpected
stopping of the flood of the Nile and the increase of the price of provisions at the period when ordinarily
they were the most abundant." The same author adds, in his Chronicle of the year 592 [6 December 1195 to 23
November 1196]: The situation became so grave that, in the palace of Abd El-Aziz, the provisions of bread
and meat ran short and one was reduced sometimes to contenting oneself with a meager piece of bread. The
lamentations were

[PDF p. 336]

great: one cried but one was not heard. This state of things had for cause the expense made at the palace
of the sultan, for the food of his family and the nourishment of his children; and the proprietors of
magazines, from whom provisions were taken by force, indemnified themselves on others; all this had as
consequence a stronger rise in the price of provisions. The merchants of provisions increasing the price
of foods to cover themselves for the losses caused them by the depredations committed at their place by
the palace of the sultan, each sought to earn his bread in a shameful way; the product of the tax on beer
and wine reached 12,000 dinars. One could licitly display the turpitude caused by these drinks, and the
sale of them was done in the squares and the shops, although one was near the moon of Rageb, and no one,
among the people, dared make a reproach either by gesture or by voice, for all this formed part of the
illicit rights the sultan used for his expenses and the upkeep of his table. The revenues of the ports
and the tax of the capitation, legal revenues, were conceded to people who no longer had any notion of
permitted or forbidden things. In the month of Ramadan, the price of grapes became exorbitant because of
the great quantity that passed to the press, and the farmers prided themselves on the privilege the sultan
had given them and on their exactness in paying the collector their farm to the last para; this farm
reached up to 17,000,000 dinars, and in addition the farmer gave the sultan a part of the beer and wine he
made. I have been told that the sultan had had made for these drinks cups of gold and silver and that many
women and men gathered in these orgies in the month of Ramadan, principally at the Khalig at the moment of
the opening of the dike, or on the Nile at the moment of the flood, and the Nile there meets debauchery.
We pray God that he not call us to account for all this and that he not hold us responsible for the
temerity of these people.

The author of the History of the Turks says: When the emir El-Melek El-Maezz 'Az el-Din Aïbek
El-Turkomani El-Salehi took the government of Egypt, in the year 680 [22 April 1281 to 10 April 1282;
text inconsistency in source] after the fall of the Ayoubite dynasty, he chose for vizier one of the
chiefs of divans named Charf el-Din Habbat ben Sa'd El-Faïzi, an accountant of Coptic nationality who had
feigned to embrace Islam in the time of El-Kamel and who

[PDF p. 337]

had attained high charges in the service of the bureaus. The latter, during his vizierate, established
taxes on the merchants, the rich people, and the proprietors, and instituted taxes and farms to which he
gave the name of "rights and dues." But when El-Melek El-Mazfar Seïf el-Din Qotouz, after the deposition
of El-Malek El-Mansour Aly ben El-Maezz Aïbek, had seized the government of Egypt, he established, at the
moment of undertaking the journey in which he was killed, a great number of taxes in order to gather the
money necessitated by his expedition against the Tartar hordes: among other exactions one must recall
this one; the properties were measured, and, on the value fixed for them, the right of alms was exacted;
moreover, each man was imposed with a dinar he had to pay, and the emir attributed to himself the third in
each succession. The whole constituted a sum of 600,000 dinars per year. Qotouz having been killed,
El-Melek El-Zaher Rokn el-Din Beibars sat after him on the throne, in the Citadel of the Mountain,
abolished all the taxes created by his predecessor, and wrote on this subject circular letters of
renunciation that were read from the pulpit. Then he suppressed the farm of the beer and all that
pertained to it, in the year 662 [4 November 1263 to 23 October 1264], and he wrote from Syria to the emir
Azz el-Din El-Halli, royal lieutenant of Egypt, to destroy the beer outlets, to make the trace of them
disappear, by demolishing the houses and breaking the vessels that served for these liquids, and to strike
this tax from the registers of the divan. "A pious man," he says in his letter, "spoke to me on this
subject and said to me: Is it possible that the wheat, of which God has made a nourishment for man, be
trodden underfoot? And I have drawn near to God by making this abuse cease. Whoever abandons something to
God, God gives him in exchange something better; and whoever abandons what came to him from an impure
source, God restores it to him by permitted ways." El-Halli therefore abolished this tax, giving some
indemnity to those who lived from it. In the year 662 he abolished the right of day-guarding at Cairo and
at Masr, a right that yielded considerable sums, and he wrote on this subject a circular. He likewise
suppressed in the provinces of Daqhalieh and of Moustahieh the right of the vali, which yielded 24,000
dinars. And on the 25th of Ramadan of the year 662 [21 July 1264],

[PDF p. 338]

there was read, at the mosque of Masr, a rescript carrying the abolition of the rights fixed as rights of
the vali of Egypt and amounting to 100,000 Egyptian dirhems; this right was therefore abolished, and with
it the farm of the hashish, which was suppressed throughout the extent of Egypt in the year 665 [2 October
1266 to 21 September 1267]; orders were given for the wine to be poured out (into the streams); the
turpitudes consequently ceased, the destruction of the houses of debauchery was decided, the cafes and the
brothels were forbidden throughout the territory of Egypt and Syria, and each locality was purged of them.
When these orders reached the cadi Nasr el-Din Ahmed ben Amir, he said:

[verses:] Eblis (the Devil) has no more to do among us; his domains are elsewhere than among the people
of the emir; his means of existence are wine and hashish, two forbidden things that were his water and
his pasture.

And the virtuous man of letters Abou-l-Hassan El-Gazzar said:

[verses:] The cup no longer has its little bubbles, and the lips are deprived of their moisture; and in
the morning the old man weeps over what is past of his youth.

On the 9th of Gamadi El-Akher of the year 666 [25 February 1268], El-Melek El-Zaher Beibars had the wine
poured out into the streets; debauchery was hunted down, and the women of the public houses were forbidden
to give themselves over to prostitution at Cairo, at Masr, and in all Egypt; the country was purged of
these turpitudes, the establishments that served for these shameful things were pillaged and their
proprietors stripped of all they possessed; some even were exiled; as for the women, they were kept in
prison until they were married. The emir prescribed all the provinces to act likewise; he withdrew from
the divan the money collected on prostitution and gave to the personages who lived from it equivalent
revenues but coming from licit sources. On the 17th of Zu-l-Hagga of the year 667 [27 July 1271], the emir
again had the wine poured out and suppressed the farm of it, which yielded 1,000 dinars per day. On this
subject, he wrote a circular that was read from the pulpit. At the beginning of the year 704 [...]

[PDF p. 339]

the wine was again poured out and rigorous measures were taken against debauchery; this day is celebrated
at Cairo. In the year 674 [27 June 1275 to 12 June 1276], the emir learned that the eunuch Chouga el-Din
'Anbar, known under the name of Sadr el-Baz (eagle's breast) and who had over the prince a considerable
influence, drank wine; he had him hanged at the foot of the Citadel of the Mountain.

When El-Melek El-Mansour Seïf el-Din Qalaoun took the direction of the affairs of Egypt, he abolished the
alms of the empire, a right collected from each individual; this right of alms, calculated according to
the fortune of each, was maintained even though the taxpayer ceased to possess anything whatever; at the
death of a person, this right was collected from his heirs. The sultan also abolished the due paid by all
the inhabitants of Egypt at the news of the taking of a fortress or any other similar fact. It was levied
on the people of Cairo and Masr in proportion to the rank they occupied, and considerable sums were
gathered by this means. He also suppressed the tax collected from the people of the protection (infidels
submitted to Islam), fixed at 1 dinar, apart from the right of capitation; this tax was attributed to the
annual upkeep of the army; he likewise suppressed the tax of the dinar levied on the merchants at the
moment of the departure of the troops and the warriors; this right was paid by all the merchants of Cairo
and Masr, each merchant being taxed at 1 dinar. He also abolished the tax collected at the moment of the
full flood of the Nile; with the money this tax yielded, feasts of preserves and fruits were made at the
Meqias; the expense of it was henceforth borne by the Treasury. He abolished finally quantities of taxes
of the same sort.

El-Melek El-Nacer Mohammed ben Qalaoun suppressed a great number of the dues of which we spoke in the
chapter of the Cadastre of El-Naser, and the last measure, of which we have been contemporary, was the
abolition of the farm of the singing-women and the farm of the qirats in the year 778 [27 May 1376 to 9
May 1377], a suppression that was executed by El-Melek El-Achraf Cha'ban ben Hasseïn ben Mohammed ben
Qalaoun. The farm of the singing-women was an abominable institution that consisted in drawing money from
the prostitutes; if one of the most considerable women went out in Masr to give herself over to debauchery
and have her name inscribed with the procuress, the latter furnished her with all she needed, and it was
impossible for the greatest man of Egypt to prevent her from giving herself over to debauchery.

[PDF p. 340]

If this woman gave birth, or became engaged, or rubbed her hands with henna, or if someone asked her in
marriage, she had to pay the fixed right to the procuress. Whoever hired, for a marriage or the
childbirth of his wife, a singing-woman without the permission of the procuress was the target of unheard-
of vexations. The right of qirat consisted in what was levied on all those who sold a property; it was
fixed at 20 dirhems for 1,000 dirhems. These two rights yielded a most considerable sum.

El-Melek El-Zaher Barqouq abolished the right collected from the people of Bourlos, of Chaoura, and of
Beltin and that had some relation with the capitation; this right produced per year 6,000 dirhems. He
suppressed the right of octroi on the wheat; this tax was paid above all by the poor people of the port of
Damietta -- that is, by those who bought two ardebs or less; he also suppressed the right with which were
struck the chicken-ovens of Nahririah and the provinces of the west; the right of present exacted from
whoever led horses, camels, or sheep to graze at El-Abassat; the tax on the dry fodder and the alfa, a tax
collected at Bab El-Nasr, outside Cairo; the farm of the singing-women at Miniet Ibn Khasib, in the
province of Achmouneïn, and at Zefta in the province of Gharbieh; the obligation to throw oxen into the
Nile, in the Delta, at the moment of the completion of the dikes, was also annulled. The emir Balbagha
El-Salemi, on his entry into the charge of equerry of the sultan El-Melek El-Nacer Farrag ben Barqouq, in
the year 801 [13 September 1398 to 2 September 1399], abolished the tax of grains at Miniet Ibn Khasib, the
right of warehousing, and that fixed on the huts of the washerwomen, taxes of a revolting injustice. He
likewise suppressed at Cairo the farm of the lake of the ox, which the Copts reestablished subsequently.

Some of these taxes have persisted until our days. And the vizier-counselor, the emir-equerry Balbagha
El-Salemi, recounted to me, in the time of his vizierate, that the sum produced by these taxes in all
Egypt reached per day some 70 and some thousand dirhems; that after examination, he had recognized that
nothing of it was spent for the well-being of the kingdom, but that this money was useful only

[PDF p. 341]

to the Copts and their friends; he had intended to abolish these taxes but had not been able to manage it.

The hilali tax comprises what is collected monthly -- for example the price of rent of covered buildings,
such as houses, shops, baths, ovens, mills, sheep-stables, and of the open-air properties, rented or not
rented. An accountant has gathered the rights collected for the hekr houses (rented according to
emphyteutic lease), the terrains planted in gardens whose price was paid each month, the fishing of fish,
the presses of flax-oil or olive-oil, under the title of hilali tax.

Ancient accountants of Egypt were of the opinion of placing the tax fixed on the people of the protection,
Jews and Christians, in a special place, after the hilali tax and before the kharagi tax, for although
this tax was collected annually, one was nevertheless of the opinion that it be paid monthly; there is,
indeed, in this manner of proceeding, some utility for those who convert to Islam or who die in the course
of the year, because they are held to pay only according to the time elapsed before their conversion or
before their death; this is why this tax has been placed between the hilali tax and the kharagi tax.

The fiefs of the army were also considered as hilali goods at the moment when a holder of a fief was
dispossessed to make place for a second feudatory, for they were taxed by lunar month and not by solar
month, in such a way that, according to the custom, if the first proprietor disappeared in the course of
the year, whether by death or by transfer of this fief to another, the first had the right to reclaim a
sum equal to the amount due for the number of months elapsed at the moment when the fief had been
withdrawn from him, and not based on the estimate of the harvest to come (the second feudatory had right
only from the date of his investiture, according to the financial custom, and the interval comprised
between the departure of the first feudatory and his replacement by the second reverted by right to the
divan and entered into the category of fief-goods without concessionary). Among the hilali taxes there
were found some that were called "dues," such as the rights of alms, of inheritance, of the ports, of
commerce, of alum, of natron, of giouchi plaster, of the mint, of the house of the title of alloys, of
buffaloes, of plaster-mills, of sheep, of plantations, of gardens, of heqr lands, of cities, of boats, the
right collected from the people of

[PDF p. 342]

the protection in addition to the capitation, the tax on the disembarkation of the sont (acacia), on the
fruits of the sont, on the vines, the guarding of the straw, the tax on the canes, the right levied on the
coursers, the tax of the carpets, the tithe of the brandies (?), and other dues. As for the individual tax
named in our time "capitation," it was collected in advance and entirely at the beginning of the year and
yielded formerly considerable sums.

The cadi El-Fadel, in his Chronicles, says: The receipt of the tax of the capitation for the year 587 [29
January 1191 to 17 January 1192] rose to 130,000 dinars. In our time, this tax has diminished much because
of the great number of Christians who pretended to be Muslims following events that took place among them.
When the sultan El-Melek El-Moayyad Cheikh took the government of Egypt after the caliphate of the
Commander of the Faithful El-Abbas ben Mohammed (surnamed) El-Mosta'ïn billah, he chose a man who was
charged with the collection of the tax of capitation; then the pursuits against the protected ones of
Islam became more ardent, and great zeal was deployed to draw money from them. This tax produced, in 816
[3 April 1413 to 22 March 1414], 114,000 dinars, without counting the gifts made to the great ones, which
were considerable.

The name of pasturage is given to all simple and pure grass that God makes grow to feed the livestock of
men. The first who had the pastures inscribed at the divan (of the tax) in Egypt was Ahmed ben Modabber,
then intendant of the revenues; to this effect, he created a bureau at the head of which he put an
energetic man charged with preventing the people from selling or buying a pasture from another person than
the divan; we have seen that, in the Said, the pastures were attached to the domains and that the emir
collected, from every person leading his herds to graze on his territory, the annual tax of grazing, a tax
he levied per head of livestock and that he received from the master of the herd in proportion to the
number of animals. When, as a consequence of the events that succeeded one another from the year 806 [21
July 1403 to 9 July 1404], the state of the Said had been completely upset, this custom fell into disuse.
The habit formerly was to name, for the pastures, a director, witnesses, and

[PDF p. 343]

accountants who made the enumeration of the herds and who collected from their master so much per head.
This collection took place only after the recession of the Nile, the germination of the pastures, and
their utilization for the livestock.

As for the right on fishing, it is established on what God makes produce as food by the fishing of the
rivers. The first who had it inserted in a divan was again Ibn Modabber, who created a special bureau but
who, ashamed to mention it under the title of right of fishing and finding the word iniquitous, had it
given the denomination of right of planting of lines and installation of nets. This right was maintained,
and for its collection there were instituted a director, witnesses, and accountants who went to different
points, such as the canal or the lake of Alexandria, the lake of Nasterou, the port of Damietta, the
cataracts of the frontier post of Assouan, and everywhere there were ponds or lakes. They set out at the
moment of the recession of the Nile, when the water withdraws from the cultivations to regain the bed of
the river and the mouths of the canals are barred and the sluices closed, which is done toward the end of
the flood of the Nile, the period when the water coming from the cultivated terrains is restored to the
river. It is then that the nets are fixed; one lets the water flow off, the fish arrive carried by the
current of the water, but the nets prevent them from fleeing with it, they gather there, one pulls them
onto the shore, one spreads them on mats, one salts them, and one encloses them in vessels. When this fish
is ready, one sells it under the name of salted fish or brine. One makes this preparation only with fish
at most a finger long. This sort of fish, when it is fresh, is called basaria (from the Greek); one eats
it grilled or roasted. One fishes in the lakes of Nesterou, of Tannis, and of Alexandria fish that one
names bouri -- named thus because they are fished near one of the villages of the district of Tannis
called Bourat, a village today destroyed and whose ethnic name is bouri. Many people bore this name, among
others the Beni Bouri; this fish also draws its name from that of this village. In our time this right of
fishing is abolished, except for the lakes of Nasterou in Bourlos and of Tannis in Damietta only; these
two lakes pertain to the particular divan, and special employees are attributed to them; all that is
fished there, bouri or other fish, belongs to the sultan, and no one has the right to take anything there
unless he is among the number of the fishermen depending on the [...]

[PDF p. 344]

ones assigned to these lakes. All the bodies of water other than these two lakes -- ponds, marshes, or
canals -- do not belong to the sultan. The lake of Alexandria, for its part, is dry, and the frontier post
of Assouan is out of the hands of the sultan and in the possession of the infidels. There are also ponds
belonging to private persons, such as Berket el-Fil (pond of the elephant), which is the property of the
descendants of El-Melek El-Zaher Beibars, and the Berket el-Ratli, belonging to the heirs of the emir
Boktamer El-Hagab, etc. The fish of these lakes are their property, they sell them, but despite this no
one is forbidden to fish there.

As for the fish of the Nile, they are carried to the fish market of Cairo where, at the moment of the sale,
the right of the sultan is collected. But the emir-equerry Gemal el-Din Youssef having increased the
tariff collected on the fisheries, the fish became rarer on the market of Cairo and their price became
higher. Abou Saïd Abd El-Rahman ben Ahmed ben Younas, in his History of Egypt, says that there was at
Alexandria an idol named Sharahil placed on one of the rocks of the sea and pointing with its finger
toward Constantinople; one did not know whether it was the work of the prophet Soliman or of Alexander.
The big fish made the circuit of (the port of) Alexandria and, it is claimed, had themselves fished near
the statue. Zeïd ben Abd El-Rahman ben Zeïd ben Aslam says: My father, who had it from his father,
recounted to me that, lying on his belly with hands and feet extended, his length was that of the foot of
the statue. A man named Ousama ben Zeïd, lieutenant of Egypt for El-Oualid ben Abd el-Melek, Commander of
the Faithful, wrote this: "We have, at Alexandria, a statue named Sharahil; it is of copper, and as silver
is rare among us, if the Commander of the Faithful desires that I overturn it and make money of it, it
will be done; if he is of another opinion, let him write me on this subject." And the emir answered: "Do
not overturn it before I have sent delegates who will attend the operation." He therefore sent faithful
people; the statue was overturned from its rock and one discovered that its eyes were two red rubies of an
inestimable price; of the copper money was made, and the fish withdrew and no longer returned to the place
where they had gathered before.

As for the right of alms, the sultan Salah el-Din Youssef ben Ayoub was the

[PDF p. 345]

first who collected it in Egypt. The cadi El-Fadel, in his Chronicles of the year 567, says that on the
13th of Rabi' El-Akher [14 November 1171], the alms, having been gathered, was distributed among the poor,
the indigent, the travelers, and those who had aided in its collection, after the four parts that revert
to the governors and the converts to Islam had been paid into the Treasury, or which are used for the way
of God and the ransoming of slaves; for these a determined right was fixed that was levied on the money and
the merchandise and on the sum produced by the collection of the tax on the herds, the palms, and the
vegetables. The total of the capitation for the year 587 amounted to 30,000 dinars, and the highest sum
that was employed for the alms and the coinage rose, in the two years 586 and 587, to 21,861 dinars. In
the year 588, says the same author, Ibn Hamdan, employee at the divan of the alms, inscribed in his hand,
for that year, a sum of 52,000 dinars as the amount of the collection of this right; he named the eunuch
Qaraghach as depository of this money, which he was not to spend, but on the contrary to keep in a chest
to employ it according to the orders that would be given to him. When Ibn 'Oneïn the poet, leaving El-Melek
El-Aziz Seïf el-Aslam Taftakin ben Negm el-din Ayoub ben Chadi, king of the Yemen, came to Egypt, he
brought with him all that this prince had given him, which was considerable; the officials of the divan of
the alms, in Egypt, seized all the merchandise he brought and reclaimed from him the right of alms on what
he brought. This happened in the time of El-Melek El-Aziz Othman ben Salah el-Din Youssef ben Ayoub ben
Chadi, and Ibn 'Oneïn made the following verses:

[verses:] Not all those who are called 'Aziz deserve this name, just as not all the clouds with lightning
produce rain. What a difference between the acts of the two 'Aziz! One gives the alms, the other takes it.

El-Aziz occupied himself, subsequently, with the collection of the right of alms and, on this subject, he
committed infamous acts, among others these: from a poor man

[PDF p. 346]

selling salt that he carried in a basket on his head, the right of alms had been reclaimed for the content
of his basket; for a camel sold for five dinars, five dirhems had been collected as right of alms. This
right, by order of the sultan, was exacted from the rich people and from all those who could bear it.
El-Melek El-Kamel Nasr el-Din Mohammed ben El-'Adel Abou Bekr ben Ayoub, on his arrival to power, withdrew
from the sum collected from everyone as right of alms the two parts of the poor and the indigent and
prescribed employing them entirely for these two classes of needy, according to (the precepts of) religion;
he also determined the part reverting to the jurisconsults, the pious people, and the people of good; this
was found very equitable; those who carried the right of alms to the divan were welcome, and those who
carried nothing were not troubled; but it happened that the rich showed themselves avaricious and did not
give the alms levied on their wealth, so much so that the poor and the indigent complained and that
denouncers proposed taking this right to farm in order to bring its revenue back to the point it reached
before. The sultan named as inspector of the divan of the alms the cadi El-As'ad Cherf el-Din
Abou-l-Mokarem ben Mohageb ben Mammati, who collected this right from all those who could pay it.
Subsequently, it was ceded to farm, for a strong due, and the injustices and exactions began again as
before. The aides of the vali of the alms went to Minieh Ibn Khasib, to Akhmim, to Qous to inspect the
objects belonging to the travelers, the pilgrims, etc. They inspected all that these people possessed and
went even so far as to search themselves under their garments to verify whether they did not carry money
on them. They obliged them to terrible oaths, to affirm that they had on them and with them nothing other
than what had been found. Some of these diabolical agents carried long iron needles with which, when they
had boarded the boats, they pierced all the bales and sacks there, fearing they might contain some
merchandise or some money. And they pushed the spying and their investigations so far that it was horrible
and shameful, and the pilgrims found themselves in a humiliating and ignominious situation before these
aides who did not fear to search under their garments and in their provision-sacks; thus the injustice was
crying and the damages

[PDF p. 347]

considerable. It is thus that one acted throughout Egypt since the time of the sultan Salah el-Din ben
Ayoub.

As for the ports (and frontier posts), one designates under this name the towns of Damietta, Tannis,
Rosetta, Eizab, Assouan, and Alexandria, the last by far the most important. In these localities, the
charges were very numerous, and among them the right of the fifth and the tax of the merchandise. The
right of the fifth was collected on the merchants who arrived by sea, on the objects of commerce they
brought, according to a tariff established by treaty. This right rose sometimes from 100 to 235 dinars
(for a single merchant); sometimes it did not even reach 20 dinars. This right bore the name of right of
the fifth; among the Greek merchants some paid the "tenth," but for this it was necessary to have a special
convention. The cadi El-Fadel says: The amount of the right of the fifth collected at Alexandria in the
year 587 rose to 28,618 dinars. The tax of the merchandise comprised the objects the divan levied (in
kind) according to what it judged necessary.

The author of the History of the vizier El-Bazouri says: In 444 [3 May 1052 to 22 April 1053], the Nile
was very low, and one possessed in magazine only a very weak quantity of grains, thus the famine was
terrible in Egypt. There was for this small abundance of grains a determining cause: it is that the vizier
Naser el-Din, having joined to his charge of vizier the functions of cadi, in the time of Abou-l-Barakah
El-Ouazir, had bought each year, on the account of the sultan, a thousand dirhems of grains in which he
traded. The former cadi then presented himself before the caliph El-Mosta'ïn billah and declared to him
that the commerce of grains was very prejudicial to the Muslims; that sometimes the value fell below the
purchase price, and as it was not possible to sell them in these conditions one kept them in the magazines
where they molded and spoiled; that there was no lack of other kinds of traffic that could cause no
prejudice to the people, yielding twice as much as the commerce of grains, without having to dread that
the objects would deteriorate in magazine, and whose price could not fall -- such as wood, soap, iron,
lead, honey, or other things of the same nature. The sultan followed this counsel, and the state of things
having thus continued, the low price of cereals

[PDF p. 348]

was maintained; it was thus for years; then the kings established a divan for commerce, and the last who
occupied himself with it was El-Zaher Barqouq.

The alum came from mines situated in the Said; on average, the divan spent for a leïtzi qantar thirty
dirhems; the Bedouins brought it from the mine to the river, at Akhmim, Siout, or Behnesa, whence it was
transported to Alexandria by the canals during the inundation. One bought it by the leïtzi qantar and sold
it by the geraoui qantar. One sold to the Greek merchants about twelve thousand geraoui qantars at the rate
of four to six dinars the qantar. In Egypt, one sold to the felt-makers and the dyers about eighty geraoui
qantars at the price of six and a half dinars the qantar. No one could buy any from the Bedouins or other
persons, and if it was discovered that someone had sold or bought any from another than the divan, he was
molested and all that was found at his place was destroyed. This right was abolished.

One finds natron to the west of Egypt in the province of Terranat; it is red or green. One also finds it
in the Faqousiyeh, but much less than in the Terranat. It is again one of those things that, after having
been the property of all, was reserved by Ibn Modabber, who had it incorporated into the divan of the
sultan. It has been thus after him until this day. The rule established by the divan was to put on sale
each year ten thousand qantars, of which thirty qantars were given annually to the official of the natron.
This quantity came from Terranat. One sold the natron at Cairo by masri qantar, on the Bahr el-Charqi and
in the Said by geraoui qantar, and at Damietta by leïtzi qantar. The cadi El-Fadel says: "The revenue of
the natron was farmed until the end of the year 585 [19 February 1189 to 7 February 1190] for the sum of
15,500 dinars, and one drew from it, in the year 586 [8 February 1190 to 28 January 1191], the sum of 7,500
dinars." We have seen that the natron had been ceded in fief to some men of the army. And when the emir
Mahmoud ben Aly became equerry and chargé d'affaires of the kingdom, in the time of El-Zaher Barqouq, he
laid hands on the natron, for which he built a place of sale, and it was not permitted to sell it
elsewhere. It is still thus.

As for the plasters of El-Giouchi, the terrains that produced them [...]

[PDF p. 349]

were situated in the eastern and western parts of Egypt; in the east at Bahteïn, Amiriat, and Miniat,
lands that were inscribed at the finances as lands subject to dues; in the west at Saft, Nahiat, Ousim;
all these domains had been sequestered by the Emir el-Giouch Badr El-Gemali for his descendants, with the
gardens situated outside Bab el-Foutouh. At his death and long after, the viziers seeking to procure money
rented them for weak sums, then they were incorporated into the divan. Ibn El-Mamoun, in his History, says:
All the gardens that belonged in property to the heirs of the Emir El-Giouch, as well as the terrains that
depended on them, did not cease to remain in their hands during all the vizierate of El-Mamoun El-Bataïhi,
without anything being reclaimed from them either as farm or for any other cause. The caliph El-'Amr bi
ahkam Allah being dead, Abou Aly ben El-Afdal ben Emir El-Giouch, having become vizier, had the domains
restored to the rightful claimants because the greatest part of it reverted to him. When he was killed and
the caliph El-Hafiz li din Allah took power, the latter ordered all the properties freed and had the
sequestered goods belonging in property to the Emir El-Giouch unbound; but Yanis, servant of El-Afdal and
vizier at that period, as well as 'Az El-Moulk, servant of El-Aouhad ben Emir El-Giouch, did not cease to
circumvent and insinuate themselves with the sultan, presenting him the books found by the heirs and
bearing the signature of the caliphs, so much so that the sultan left them the goods (they held) and these
goods no longer left their hands. Subsequently, the divan of El-Hafiz consented to a release on these
goods, in the year 527 [12 November 1132 to 31 October 1133]. In the year 531 [29 September 1136 to 18
September 1137], when El-Khatir and El-Murtadi were employees of the vizier Redouan ben Oualakhchi, the
gardens only and not the other lands returned to the heirs, in the state in which they were -- that is, in
very bad condition and yielding little. The heirs of El-Giouch having died out, and as there remained only
an old woman, the fiqihs of that time rendered a decree that made the sequestration cease, and the
terrains were seized and incorporated into the properties of the sultan. Of these goods, some are still
today the property of the sultan, others have become wakfs, sequestered properties, etc.

[PDF p. 350]

There was a mint at Cairo, a second at Alexandria, and a third at Qous; only the cadi of cadis, or his
agent, had the right to verify the title (purity) of the mint. In our time this custom is much fallen;
this privilege has become the appanage of corrupt Jews who simulate Islam but who, despite their apparent
conversion, remain plunged in turpitude. Formerly one put the greatest zeal into controlling the purity of
the gold and the maintenance of its title, but the corruption arrived with El-Nazer Farrag, who had struck
the naseri dinars, money of very bad alloy. The transactions were done from then on at Cairo in silver,
but this was rendered impossible by El-Malek El-Kamel Mohammed ben Abou Bekr ben Ayoub in the year 20-some;
this prince struck the round dinars named kameli, which were composed of a third of copper and two thirds
of silver. One continued to coin money at Cairo until the emir Mahmoud El-Astadar multiplied the striking
of copper at Cairo and Alexandria; the dirhems then disappeared from Egypt, and from that period until the
present the transactions are done among the inhabitants in copper money, which replaces gold and all
merchandise. I will give an account of all this, God willing, when I come to speak of the causes of the
ruin of Egypt. The mint yielded the sultan strong sums, but this revenue has much diminished in our time
because of the lack of riches. Today the mint depends on the particular divan.

The house of verification had been instituted for the greatest good of the subjects and to verify their
weights and their measures. The sultan also drew money from it, and the sultan Salah el-Din put it in wakf
for the upkeep of the wall of Cairo; it will be spoken of when there is question of the quarters of Cairo
in this book.

One calls hekr the price fixed for (the rental of) vacant terrains at Cairo and at Masr: of these goods
some serve as lodging for the inhabitants, others are cultivated in gardens; this revenue formed part of
the royal goods formerly, since then it has been withdrawn from the royal divan. The hekr goods were
situated at Masr, at Cairo, and in the interval comprised between these two towns; they were put in wakfs
and assigned to very diverse chapters.

The plantations were found only in the Gharbieh and comprised certain terrains on which a right similar to
the hekr right and fixed per feddan was levied. This has been withdrawn from the divan.

[PDF p. 351]

The right of the dikes was common to all the provinces, proportionally for each to a determined number of
parcels; each parcel being taxed at 10 dinars; this money was employed for the repair of the dikes; the
surplus, a strong sum moreover, was paid into the Treasury. This right was abolished too, and Naser Farrag
established for the dikes new rights of which there will be question in the book of the Causes of the ruin.

The right of the straw. -- All the straw of the land of Egypt was divided into three parts: that of the
divan, that of the feudatories, and that of the cultivators. Such was the rule for the collection of the
straw throughout the extent of Egypt; for a hundred loads of straw, one received four dinars and a sixth,
and by this means much money was gathered. This right was also struck from the divan.

Of the land tax. -- There were in the province of Behnesa, of Saft Richeïn, of Achmounein, of Siout, of
Akhmim, and of Qous, innumerable acacias that people were charged to guard and destined for the
construction of the vessels of the fleet. One cut them only as needs arose, and certain trees had a value
of a hundred dinars. One drew from these provinces certain revenues called tax of impost, which were
collected supposedly as reimbursement of what the inhabitants of these provinces cut and employed -- the
sont wood in their constructions. One collected from them again another right named right of sont, and the
money thus obtained served to pay the felling of the wood; per hundred loads one collected one dinar. The
employees of this service had to watch that what could be used for the buildings of the fleet was
respected and that only the extremities of the branches were cut -- parts that could be used only to make
fire. The wood thus cut was called heating wood and was sold to the merchants at the rate of four dinars
the hundred loads. One inscribed in their presence the weight of what was sold to them, and when the boat,
with its cargo of wood, arrived at the quay of Masr, one verified by comparing the content of the boat with
the statement that had been sent; the tax was collected according to what was carried on the statement.
Ordinarily, for the woods of Behnesa, one sold only what was useless to the needs of the sultan. All this
was abolished and these trees fell into the public domain; there remained no more trace of this right,
which was forgotten by the divan.

As for the qarz -- that is, the fruit of the sont tree -- nothing of it could

[PDF p. 352]

be traded except by the divan, and if any was discovered at someone's place of another provenance than the
divan, the individual was maltreated and all that was found at his place was destroyed. When the harvest of
the qarz was finished, boats were loaded with it and, when it was sold, one collected a quarter of the
price at the moment of the arrival of the qarz at the quay of Masr, whether it was bought at a debated
price or whether the sale took place at auction. That was a crying injustice and was abolished.

Tax on the people of the protection. -- This right was collected at Masr, Alexandria, and Akhmim only, and
not in the other countries; it was established on the merchandise the protected ones imported or exported,
according to a tax established by the divan. It was likewise abolished.

Tax on the buffaloes, the field-oxen, and the sheep. -- The sultan drew from this tax considerable money.
The divan collected indeed, per head of buffalo, from five to three dinars per year for those employed in
the works (of the fields), the small ones paying the half of what the big ones paid; the least one drew
from it was about fifty percent (of the value of the animal); similar to the tax that struck the buffaloes
was that which applied to the field-oxen, the white sheep, the goats, the bees. These rights were
abolished, which had been established only because of the lack of money of the sultan, who cared less for
the prosperity (of the country) and the means of attaining it than for multiplying the causes of the ruin.

In the time of the Fatimids, the inheritances were not regulated as today; one had then the habit of
making all the relatives inherit, and if a daughter found herself alone, she had right to the totality of
the inheritance. But after the domination of the Fatimids, the Ayoubites, and the Turks, the sultan made
the successions in escheat enter into his revenues -- that is, those which, for lack of heirs, were to
revert to the Treasury. The viziers, regarding these successions, acted sometimes with justice, but
sometimes also very unjustly.

For the customs duties, we have set forth above when and by which kings they were instituted; some have
remained until the present under the direction of the vizier, but in reality they are useful only to the
Copts, who use them without any right. In our days, at the moment when we live, these rights have doubled
since the time when the emir Gemal el-Din Youssef El-Astadar occupied himself with the royal finances, as
will be explained in the book of the Causes of the ruin.

[PDF p. 353]

As for the gifts, one thus calls the money one receives from the vali, the functionaries, the cadi, the
governor of a country; the first who collected money in this way was El-Saleh ben Raziq, who took it from
the valis of the provinces only; then this due was abolished in the time of El-Aziz ben Salah el-Din, but
for some time only, for it was reestablished by El-Zaher Barqouq, as one will see in the Causes of the
ruin.

As for the protections and the right of surety, these taxes were established in the time of El-Nacer
Farrag, who created for them a bureau and employees; the emirs did likewise, and it was one of the
principal causes of the ruin, as one will see in its place, God willing!

[PDF p. 354]

CHAPTER XL
OF THE PYRAMIDS

The pyramids were formerly very numerous in Egypt; there were a great number of them in the district of
Aboukir: some great, others small; some of silt and bricks, but most of stone; some stepped, others with
a smooth surface. At Gizeh, facing the town of Masr, there were a great quantity of them, all small, which
were destroyed, in the time of the sultan Saleh el-Din Youssef ben Ayoub, by Qaraqouch, who used the
materials thus obtained to build the Citadel of the Mountain, the enclosing wall of Cairo and Masr, and
the bridges of Gizeh. The three greatest are those that still subsist facing Masr. There is agreement
neither on the period of their construction, nor on the name of those who raised them, nor on the cause of
their erection. Many contradictory legends have been recounted on this subject, most of which are without
foundation; for me, I will tell you of their history things that will satisfy and content you, God
willing.

The writer master Ibrahim Waçif Shah, in his History of Egypt and its Marvels, in speaking of Sourid ben
Sahluq ben Seriaq ben Tumidoun ben Badresan ben Housal, one of the kings who governed Egypt before the
flood and who resided in the town of Amsous -- of which there will be question in the chapter of this book
that treats of the towns of Egypt -- says: It is he who raised in Egypt the two great pyramids that are
attributed to Sheddad ben 'Ad: the Copts claim that, thanks to the power of their magic, the Adites could
not penetrate into their country. Here is the cause of the erection of the two pyramids: Three hundred
years before the flood, Sourid had a dream in which it seemed to him that the earth turned over; the men
fled straight before them, the stars fell and collided with one another with a terrible din; Sourid,
frightened, spoke to no one of this dream, but he was convinced that a grave event was going to occur in
the world. Some days after he had

[PDF p. 355]

another dream in which it seemed to him that the fixed stars fell upon the earth in the form of white
birds and, seizing the men in flight, hurled them between two high mountains that closed over them, and
these brilliant stars became somber and dark. Full of terror on his waking, he went to the temple of the
Sun, prostrated himself, rolled his face in the dust, and wept. As soon as the day appeared, he assembled
the chiefs of the priests of all the provinces of Egypt, to the number of 130. He shut himself up with
them and set forth to them what he had seen in his first and his second dream. The priests explained to
the king that an extraordinary event was to occur in the world, and the greatest among them, named
Aqlimoun, said to him: The dreams of kings are not produced without reason, because of the importance of
princes. I will recount to Pharaoh a dream that I too have had and of which I have spoken to no one. It
seemed to me that I was seated with the king in the tower of Amsous; the sky, leaving its place, descended
and drew near our heads, forming above us a sort of dome that enveloped us. The king raised his hands
toward the sky, whose stars intermingled in multiple images and diverse forms; the people ran, seeking a
refuge toward the palace of the king and asking help. The king carried his hands to his head, ordering me
to do likewise, and we were both in a terrible anxiety. And behold, from the tower where we were, we saw a
part of the sky open up; a dazzling light escaped from this breach, the sun appeared there, and we set
about imploring it. And the Sun told us that the sky would return to its first place. I awoke full of
terror, then I fell asleep again and I saw the town of Amsous overturned with its inhabitants, the idols
falling on their heads; men descended from the sky holding in their hands whips of iron with which they
struck the mortals: "Why," I asked them, "do you treat the men thus?" "It is," they answered, "that they
have shown themselves impious toward their God." "Have they not," I said, "some means of redeeming
themselves?" And they answered: "Yes, let him who wishes to be saved go to join the master of the ark."
Thereupon I awoke full of fright. The king then said: "Take the elevations of the stars and see what is to
come." After a minute examination, it was recognized that a flood was to take place, after which would
appear a fire come out of the constellation of the Lion that would burn the world. "See again," said the
king, "if this disaster will reach

[PDF p. 356]

our country." "Yes," they said, "the flood will reach the greatest part of it and it will remain ruined
for long years." "See," said the king, "if this country will become prosperous again as before or if it
will remain always covered by the waters." "The countries," answered the priests, "will return to their
ancient state and will become prosperous again." "And after?" asked the king. "Our country will be
attacked by a king who will exterminate the inhabitants and seize their riches." "And after?" "A barbarous
people, come from the mountains of the Nile, will attack it and make itself master of the greatest part of
the territory." "And after?" "The Nile will be cut off and the country abandoned by its inhabitants." Then
the king ordered the pyramids to be constructed and corridors to be made in them through which the Nile
would penetrate up to a determined point, then flow off toward certain regions of the west and the Said;
he had the pyramids filled with talismans, marvels, riches, and idols; he had the bodies of the kings
deposited there and, according to his orders, the priests traced on these monuments all the maxims of the
sages; one therefore wrote, on all the possible points of the pyramids -- ceilings, bases, walls -- all
the sciences familiar to the Egyptians, and one drew there the figures of the stars, one wrote there the
names of the drugs and their useful and harmful properties, the science of talismans, of mathematics, of
architecture, all the sciences in a word, and all this was set forth very clearly for those who know their
writing and understand their language.

Having taken this resolution, the king had blocks cut, enormous slabs polished, lead extracted from the
land of the West, and the rocks from the region of Assouan, and the foundations of the three pyramids --
Eastern, Western, and Colored -- were laid. The workers had with them sheets (of papyrus) covered with
writing, and as soon as a stone was cut and dressed, one placed one of these sheets on the stone, to which
one gave a blow, and this blow sufficed to make it traverse a distance of 100 sahmes (200 bow-shots); and
one began again until the stone arrived on the plateau of the pyramids. There, one put in place the slab
in the middle of which one pierced a hole; in this hole, one planted vertically a rod of iron, then one
placed on the first slab a second pierced likewise with a hole into which the iron rod penetrated; then
one made molten lead flow into the hole around the rod in order to fasten the two slabs and render them
immovable; one continued thus until the completion of

[PDF p. 357]

the pyramid. These monuments finished, the king had doors dug in them 40 cubits below the level of the
soil. The door of the Eastern pyramid is turned toward the east and opens 100 cubits from the face of the
pyramid; the door of the Western pyramid is to the west and 100 cubits from the face of the pyramid; the
door of the Colored pyramid is turned toward the south and 100 cubits likewise from the face of the
pyramid. If at this distance one digs (vertically), one finds (at 40 cubits of depth) the door that
permits, by a vaulted and masoned corridor, entering the pyramid. The king calculated, for each of the
pyramids, a height above the soil of 100 cubits, which makes 500 of our present cubits; the length of each
of the faces was also 100 cubits, and the faces were calculated in such a way that the summit was stopped
at 8 of our cubits (from the geometric apex). The construction of these pyramids was begun at a favorable
rising of constellations, chosen by all by common accord. When they were finished, they were covered from
top to bottom with colored brocade, and a feast was instituted for them at which all the inhabitants of
Egypt attended. In the Western pyramid were arranged thirty magazines of colored granite filled with all
sorts of riches and diverse objects: statues of precious stones, magnificent iron tools, rustless arms,
malleable glass, extraordinary talismans, simple and composed drugs, mortal poisons. In the Eastern
pyramid were executed chambers where the sky and the stars were represented, where were heaped what the
ancestors of Sourid had done in the way of statues, the perfumes one burned to the planets, the books that
concerned them, the table of the fixed stars and the table of their revolution in the succession of time,
the list of the events of past epochs subject to their influence, and the moment when one must examine
them to know the future, finally all that concerned Egypt until the end of time; moreover, one deposited
there the basins containing the magic water and other similar things. In the Painted pyramid, one
deposited the bodies of the priests enclosed in coffins of black granite; with each priest was a book
where were retraced the marvels of the art he had exercised, his acts and his life, what had been done in
his time, and what had been and will be from the beginning until the end of time; on each face of the
pyramids were represented personages executing all sorts of works and ranged according to their importance
and their dignity; these

[PDF p. 358]

representations were accompanied by the description of the trades, the tools necessary to them, and all
that concerns them; no science was neglected: all were there described and drawn; one deposited again in
the pyramid the treasures of the planets, what had been given to the stars, and the treasures of the
priests; all this forming enormous and incalculable sums.

To each of the pyramids a guardian was assigned: the Western pyramid was placed under the guard of a
statue in granite mosaic; this statue was standing, holding in its hand something like a javelin, and
coiffed with a viper folded upon itself. As soon as someone approached the statue, the viper darted upon
him, wound itself around his neck, killed him, and returned to its place. The guardian of the Eastern
pyramid was a statue of black stone spotted with black and white, with open and shining eyes; it was
seated on a throne and held a javelin. If someone looked at it, he heard from the side of the statue a
frightful voice that made him fall on his face, and he died there without being able to get up. Over the
Painted pyramid watched a statue in eagle-stone (aetite) placed on a pedestal of similar stone. Whoever
looked at it was drawn toward it, stuck to it, and could not detach himself from it until he was dead. All
this being finished, the pyramids were surrounded with immaterial spirits; victims were slaughtered for
them, a ceremony that was to protect them against whoever would wish to approach them, with the exception
of the initiated who would have accomplished the necessary rites.

The Copts recount in their books that on the flanks of the pyramids is engraved a text that in their
language signifies: "It is I, Sourid, the king who raised these pyramids at such and such a period; I
finished their construction in six years; if anyone of those who come after me claims to be my equal, let
him destroy them in six hundred years; one knows however that it is easier to destroy than to construct. I
have, after their completion, covered them with brocade; let another cover them only with mats." And after
examination it was recognized that the most prolonged times could destroy nothing of them.

The Copts recount again that the spirit attached to the pyramid of the north is a yellow and naked devil
whose mouth is furnished with long teeth; that of the pyramid of the south is a naked woman who shows her
natural parts; she is beautiful, but her mouth is garnished with long teeth; she charms the [...]

[PDF p. 359]

men who look at her, smiles at them, draws them, and makes them lose their reason. The spirit of the
painted pyramid is an old man who holds a church censer in which perfumes burn. Many people have seen on
repeated occasions these spirits making the circuit of the pyramid toward the middle of the day and at
sunset.

After his death, Sourid was buried in the pyramid, and with him his riches and his treasures. It is Sourid
who, according to the Copts, would have built the temples, deposited treasures in them, engraved on their
walls the sciences, and given them as guardians spirits charged with protecting them against whoever might
wish to destroy them. As for the pyramids of Dachour, they were, it is said, raised by Shaddat ben 'Adim
with stones cut formerly by his father. According to some authors, this Shaddat would be the same as
Haddah ben 'Ad; but those who refuse to admit that the Adites entered Egypt fail to recognize the name of
Shaddat ben 'Adim and say Shaddat ben 'Ad, a name they have much more often occasion to pronounce than the
other, which is not of frequent use; according to those, a single (foreign) king would have penetrated
into Egypt and subdued its inhabitants: this king is Bokht Nasr (Nebuchadnezzar). But God is the most
learned!

In his book entitled News of the Times and of Those Whom Misfortunes Have Annihilated, Abou-l-Hassan
El-Maç'oudi recounts that the caliph Abdallah Al-Mamoun, ben Haroun El-Rachid, during his journey in
Egypt, having gone to visit the pyramids, had the desire to demolish one to know what it enclosed. "It is
impossible," he was told. "It is absolutely necessary to open one," he answered. And the breach that is
still gaping today was made for him; one employed for this fire, vinegar, levers; smiths worked at it and
spent considerable sums on it. The thickness of the wall was about 20 cubits; having reached the end of
this wall, they found at the bottom of the hole a green basin filled with minted gold; there were 1,000
dinars in it, each dinar weighing an ounce. Al-Mamoun admired the purity of this gold and, having had the
sum of the expenses caused by the breach made in the pyramid established, it was found that the gold thus
discovered was the absolute equivalent of this sum. The caliph was filled with astonishment in seeing that
the ancients had been able to know precisely the sum that would be spent and the precise place where the
basin of dinars would be found. This basin was, it is said, of emerald; Al-Mamoun had it carried to his
treasury, and it was one of the most astonishing marvels fabricated in Egypt.

[PDF p. 360]

For long years, use was made of the breach of Al-Mamoun, and a number of people penetrated there and
followed the slope thus arranged; some returned safe and sound, others perished. One day, a score of young
men gathered to penetrate there and prepared for this effect all that was necessary -- foods, drinks,
ropes, candles, etc. They engaged in the corridor and saw there bats as big as vultures that struck their
faces. Then one of them was lowered by means of ropes, but the opening of the well closed over him; they
made all their efforts to pull him out and ceased only when at the end of their strength. They then heard
a frightful voice that made them faint. When they came to themselves, they left the pyramid, and while they
were seated, astonished at what had happened to them, behold, their companion came out of the earth before
them, set about pronouncing words they could not understand, then fell dead. They took him and carried him
off, but the police seized them and led them to the vali, to whom they recounted their adventure. Then
they asked the explanation of the words their companion had pronounced before dying, and they were
translated thus: "Thus will be punished whoever seeks what he must not know." This explanation was given
to them by a man of the Said.

"I have reflected," says Aly ben Radouan the physician, "on the construction of the pyramids, and I have
concluded that profound theoretical and practical knowledge in architecture and mechanics had been needed
by those who had traced the square of their base, cut the male and female stones, and coated the whole
with marine plaster, so as to make the construction rise to the point where it was possible to raise heavy
weights. The more the construction rose, the more it went narrowing, in such a way that the surface of the
square (of the second course), parallel to the square of the base, formed a square smaller than that of
the base itself. Then on this second course was traced another square narrower still by the quantity
necessary for the heavy weights to be raised there, and at each course a stone perfectly fitted,
alternately male and female, was deposited, forming a course equal to the preceding; one continued thus
until the point where it was no longer possible to continue; then the height was truncated and the
projecting edges, used for the elevation of the heavy materials, were beaten down, and in doing this
operation from the top to the bottom, they obtained a (smooth) block forming the pyramid."

[PDF p. 361]

The first pyramid, measured according to the cubit still in use today in Egypt for construction, counts
for the length of each face (side of the base) 400 cubits, which makes in black cubits -- whose length is
24 fingers -- 500 cubits, and the base being square, the sides are equal as well as the angles. Two of
these sides are parallel to the meridian line, the two others are parallel to the east-west line, and each
side is 500 black cubits. The apothem descending from the summit of the pyramid to the middle of the side
of the base is 470 cubits and would be, if the pyramid were complete, also 500 cubits. The faces of the
pyramid form four triangles; these four triangles are isosceles, and each of their sides would measure, if
the pyramid were complete, 560 cubits, and the four triangles would be joined by their summit at a single
point that would be the summit of the pyramid. These diverse dimensions entail for the height a value of
430 cubits; it is on this line that the centers of gravity are found. Each of the triangles forming the
faces of the pyramid measures a total surface of 125,000 square cubits, and in making the total of their
surface, one obtains, for the total surface of the pyramid, 500,000 black cubits. And I have never heard
it said that there was in the world a more colossal construction, nor more beautiful, nor more grandiose.
And God knows better!

Al-Mamoun, having opened a breach in this pyramid, discovered there a corridor that led, by a sloping path,
to a chamber of cubic form; on the floor was a coffin of marble, still in place today, for no one has been
able to draw it out. It is according to this that Galen recounts that the pyramids were tombs. Here is what
he says on this subject toward the end of the fifth book of his treatise on Hygiene: "They give the name
of haram to whoever has reached that age (old age); this name is derived from that of the pyramids (al-ahram)
in which they will soon have to be placed." El-Hauqali, in his Description of Egypt, says: "One sees in
this country the two pyramids that have not their likes on the surface of the earth, neither in Muslim
country nor in infidel country; one has never made and one will never make any like them. One of the
Abbasids read the following phrase on one of them: 'I have built them both; let him who claims the title
of powerful king demolish them! to demolish is however easier than to construct.' And the Abbasid attempted
it (I believe it is a question here of Al-Mamoun or El-Mo'tassem),

[PDF p. 362]

but the revenues of Egypt could not have sufficed for the task, and yet in his time, these revenues,
collected with equity, justice, benevolence toward the subjects, the Nile reaching 17 cubits and 6
fingers, amounted to 4,257,000 dinars, the tax being 2 dinars per feddan. He therefore abandoned his
project and occupied himself with it no more.

At the limit of the territory of Fostat, to the west of the Nile, one meets colossal constructions, in
considerable number, and which are spread even into the Said; they are called pyramids; but they could not
be compared to the two pyramids situated facing Fostat and at two parasangs from this locality. The height
of each of these two pyramids is 400 cubits, their width is equal to the height; they are constructed in
stone of El-Kaddan; each stone has a length and a thickness of 10 to 8 cubits according to the place it
was to occupy per the exigencies of the technique; for these two pyramids become narrower as they rise, so
as to leave at the summit a surface equal to that which would be necessary to permit a camel to kneel; the
faces of these pyramids are covered with Greek writings. It has been claimed that these monuments were
tombs, but that is not exact; their constructor had them raised only because he had foreseen the flood and
knew that this cataclysm would destroy all that was found on the surface of the earth, with the exception
of what could be conserved in edifices such as these two pyramids; thus he stored in them all he could of
precious objects and treasures, and the flood having occurred, then having withdrawn, all the content of
the pyramids became the property of Bensar ben Mesraïm ben Ham ben Nouh (Noah). The later kings converted
these monuments into magazines and established deposits in them. And God knows it better than anyone.

Abou Ya'koub Mohammed ben Ishaq El-Nadim, the paper-maker, in his book entitled The Index, says regarding
Hermes El-Baheli: "There is no agreement on his account; he was, it is said, one of the seven guardians
charged with the surveillance of the seven temples (of the planets), and to whom was assigned the guard of
the temple of Atared (Mercury) whose name he took, for Atared in the Chaldean language signifies Hermes.
It is recounted that for certain motives he transported himself to Egypt where he reigned and had children,
among whom Ta, Sa, Ashmoun, Atrib, and

[PDF p. 363]

Qouft; that he was the wisest of his time, and that after his death he was buried in the monument known at
Masr under the name of Abou-Hermes, but to which most of the Greeks give the name of El-Harameïn (the two
pyramids), for one of them is his tomb and the other the tomb of his wife. According to others, the latter
would be the tomb of the son of Hermes, a son who would have succeeded him after his death.

These monuments -- I mean the pyramids -- have a length of 480 hachemite cubits by a width of also 480
cubits. From the base, the construction goes narrowing and, at the summit, the dimensions (of the plateau)
are no more than 40 cubits (on each face), and this is done intentionally and by calculation. In the
middle of the plateau is constructed a pretty chamber, in the interior of which rises a sort of mausoleum.
At the summit of the tomb are two blocks perfectly polished and magnificent, surmounted by two stone
statues representing a man and a woman who face each other. The man holds in his hand a stone tablet
covered with writing, and the woman a mirror and a tablet of gold ornamented with admirable sculptures.
Between the two pedestals is a stone vase closed with a lid of gold; if one lifts the lid, one perceives a
sort of odorless and dried pitch, in which is placed a box of gold enclosing a mass of blood that takes,
on contact with air, the coagulation particular to blood, then dries up. The tombs are closed with stone
lids which, once withdrawn, let one see in one of them a man lying on his back, perfectly conserved and
dried and whose flesh is still apparent as well as the hair; in the neighboring sarcophagus is the body of
a woman in the same position and in the same state as that of the man. In this terrace is pierced a
corridor of a man's height, sinking like an underground passage; the vault of it is made of stones, and
one sees there portraits and statues lying or standing, and quantities of other things whose signification
is not known.

The ulema Mouafeq el-Din Abd el-Latif ben Abou-l-'Az Youssef ben Abou-l-Barakat Mohammed ben 'Aly ben Sa'd
El-Baghdadi, better known under the name of Ibn El-Moutahan, recounts, in his History, that one day a
foreign infidel came to the king El-Aziz Othman ben Salah el-Din ben Youssef and persuaded him that under
the small pyramid was a treasure. One sent stonecutters [...]

[PDF p. 364]

of stones and a multitude of soldiers who set about demolishing it and spent at this work months and
months; but, unable to come to the end of it, they abandoned it; the sums spent and the technical
researches employed in this enterprise were considerable. And today, whoever might see the mass of stones
removed from the pyramid would believe that it is completely destroyed, but in looking at the pyramid
itself, one discovers there only insignificant breaches. I had the occasion to see the stonecutters, and I
asked their chief if he could put these stones back in their place. "Even though," he answered me, "the
sultan gave us a thousand dinars per stone, it would be impossible for us."

Abou-l-Hassan El-Maçaoudi, in his Prairies of Gold, expresses himself thus: "As for the pyramids, their
height is astonishing and their construction marvelous. They are covered with several sorts of
inscriptions in the diverse languages of peoples past and disappeared. People versed in the science of
measures assure that the vertical height of the great pyramid is at least 400 cubits, and that as the
construction rises, it narrows progressively. The width is approximately equal to the height; its faces
are covered with texts and tables relative to the sciences, to the magical recipes, to the secrets of
nature; one of these inscriptions says: We have built them (the pyramids), and if some king claims to
equal us and attain our power, let him destroy them and efface their trace! To destroy is however easier
than to construct, and to disaggregate easier than to unite."

It is recounted that a Muslim king had the idea of destroying one, but the revenues of Egypt could not
have sufficed for it, for it was of stone and marble. These pyramids were tombs of kings. Formerly, when a
king died, his body was placed in a stone vat, named by the Egyptians and the Syrians geroun, which was
closed; then one constructed the base of a pyramid according to the dimensions established per the chosen
height, and one deposited the sarcophagus in the middle of the pyramid, and over it one built a vault,
then one raised the construction according to the determined dimensions, reserving the entrance of the
pyramid below the pyramid itself; from the door started a corridor vaulted in stone whose underground
length was 100 cubits at most. Each of these pyramids has a door that leads there, as we have just said.
One constructed some of these pyramids

[PDF p. 365]

with edged steps like staircases; when the construction was finished, one smoothed the faces from top to
bottom. Such was their method of construction, and for this they needed strength, patience, and obedience.

In the book of the Constructions and Marvels, it is said that the two pyramids situated to the west of
Fostat Masr are monuments that can count among the marvels of the world. Each of them is 400 cubits in
height by as much in width; they are constructed in enormous stones and exposed to the four winds, each of
the edges of their angles facing one of the winds; the wind that has the most influence on them is that of
the south named merisi. One of these pyramids is the tomb of A'adimoun and the other that of Hermes;
between these two personages there is nearly a thousand years, A'adimoun being the elder of the two. The
inhabitants of Egypt -- that is, the Copts -- claim that these two personages were two prophets appeared
before the coming of Christianity; this opinion is conformable to that the Sabeans profess on the subject
of the prophets, but not with that one must have regarding the high prophecy; but for the Copts, the two
prophets in question were pure souls, holy, exempt from terrestrial corruptions and provided with the
celestial inspiration. Thus they knew the events before they had occurred and were ignorant of nothing of
the secrets of the world and the rest. Among the Arabs of the Yemen, some consider the two pyramids as the
tombs of Sheddad ben 'Ad and another of their kings who conquered Egypt formerly; those are pure Arabs of
the tribe of Amalek and others. But, according to what we have just said of the doctrine of the Sabeans,
they are the tombs of pure bodies.

Abou Zeid El-Balkhi found, in the midst of the inscriptions traced on the pyramid, a certain line that was
translated into Arabic and that signified: "These two pyramids were raised when the falling Eagle was in
the Crab (Cancer)." The calculation has been made of the time elapsed since that moment until the hijra of
the Prophet, and it was found 2 times 36,000 solar years -- that is, 72,000 solar years.

El-Hamadani, in his book Of the Crowns, says: Of all that was submerged by the flood, nothing has
subsisted but the village of Nehaouend, found such as it had been before the cataclysm, and the pyramids
of the Said.

[PDF p. 366]

Abou Mohammed Abd Allah ben Abd El-Rahim El-Qisi, in his book Present of the Hearts, reports that the
pyramids are square by the base and triangular by their faces and that they are eighteen in number. Facing
Fostat there are three, of which the principal has a perimeter of 2,000 cubits, each side being 500
cubits; its height is 500 cubits also. Each of the stones that composes it has 30 cubits of thickness by a
width of 10 cubits; the disposition and the cut of these stones are perfect. Near the town of the Pharaoh
of Joseph is another pyramid still greater and more imposing, its perimeter being 3,000 cubits and its
height 750; the stones of which it is built measure each 50 cubits. In the vicinity of the town of the
Pharaoh of Moses is a pyramid still greater and more extraordinary; finally another pyramid known under
the name of pyramid of Madoum (Meïdoum) is similar to a mountain and is composed of five stages. Al-Mamoun
opened the greatest of the pyramids situated facing Fostat, entered the corridor of this edifice, and
penetrated into a chamber square at the base and vaulted at the summit, very great and in the middle of
which was dug a well of 10 cubits of depth. This well was square, and the men who descended there met on
each face a door leading to a vast hall filled with dead bodies each of which was wrapped in a shroud
longer than would be a hundred robes (sewn end to end). Time has altered these cadavers, which have become
black; these bodies, which are not bigger than ours, have lost nothing of their tissue nor of their hair;
one finds there no body of old men or men with white hair; these bodies were still solid, and no one could
detach a single limb from them, but they were extremely light, time having rendered them as little heavy
as dry straw. In this well were thus four chambers filled with cadavers and enormous bats. The ancients
buried likewise all the animals in the sand, and, for me, I found a roll of cloth forming a big volume of
more than a cubit of thickness. The cloth had been worn by time; but, having unrolled it, I found a piece
of linen intact and white like a turban, with some traces of red silk, and finally, in the interior, a
dead hoopoe to which was missing neither a feather nor any part of its body and such as if it had died
recently. In the chamber reserved in the interior of the pyramid is a door that leads to the

[PDF p. 367]

summit of the monument; the corridor has no stairs and measures nearly five spans in width. It is
recounted that in the time of El-Mamoun a man having penetrated there arrived at a small chamber where was
a statue of a man in green stone like the dahang. This statue was brought to El-Mamoun. It had a lid that
was withdrawn, and one found the body of a man clad in a cuirass of gold incrusted with all sorts of
precious stones; on the chest was placed a sword of an inestimable price, and near the head was a red ruby
the size of a hen's egg that lit up like a flame and that Al-Mamoun took for himself. The statue from
which this dead man had been drawn was thrown near the door of the king's palace at Cairo, where I saw it
in the year 511 [5 May 1117 to 23 April 1118].

The cadi El-Galil Abou Abd Allah Mohammed ben Salamat El-Qoda'ï says: Aly ben El-Hassan ben Khalaf ben
Qadid reports the following fact on the authority of Yahia ben Othman ben Salèh, who had it from Mohammed
ben Aly ben Sakhr El-Tamimi: An inhabitant of the village of Qoft, very versed in the affairs and the
history of Egypt, and who occupied himself with its ancient books and its ruins, recounted to me having
found in an antique volume a text that said, regarding the pyramids: Some people, having cleared a tomb in
the convent of Abou-Hermes, found there a dead man wrapped in his shroud and bearing on his chest a paper
rolled in a cloth. Having drawn it out, they looked at the writing but could understand nothing of it, the
paper being written in the ancient language of the Egyptians. They sought someone who could read it to
them but in vain. They were then told that at the convent of Qlimoun in the Fayoum was a monk who knew
this kind of writing. They went in search of this monk, doubting much that he could explain it to them,
but he read it, and here is what the text signified: This book was written in the first year of the
emperor Diocletian, and we have copied it from a book itself copied in the first year of the emperor
Philip. This emperor had had it copied from sheets of gold on which the writing was separated letter by
letter. A translation was made of the original book for Philip by the two Coptic brothers Eïlou and
Yertsa. The emperor having asked them how they knew how to read things the others were ignorant of, they
recounted that they were the descendants of one of the ancient Egyptians who alone

[PDF p. 368]

had not been drowned by the flood; that he owed his salvation to this circumstance, that, alone among the
Egyptians, he went to Noah and believed in him, and that Noah took him with him in the ark; that, the
water of the flood having withdrawn, he came to Egypt with some of the descendants of Cham (Ham), son of
Noah, and that he remained there until his death; that his son inherited his knowledge of the Egyptian
language and that they had inherited it likewise, this science transmitting itself in the family from
eldest to eldest. The duration of the time elapsed until the copy of Philip was 2,372 years. As for the
one who had the copy made on sheets of gold in writing separated letter by letter such as Philip found it,
his epoch was separated from that of the original manuscript (?) by 1,785 years. The copied book said this:
We have examined what the stars prognosticated and we have seen that a scourge would descend from the sky
or come out of the earth; when this event was certain for us, we sought what it would be and we discovered
that the water would cover the earth, destroying its animals and its plants. Being altogether certain of
the event, we said to our king Sourid ben Sahlouq: Have lodgings constructed for us, a tomb for you and
another for the members of your family. Then the king raised for the others the Eastern pyramid, for his
father Houheït the Western pyramid, and for the son of Houheït the Painted pyramid. One raised the lodgings
(?) in the Delta and in the Said, and we represented on their walls the profound sciences, astronomy and
prognostication, the stars, alchemy, the arts, medicine, and all the useful or harmful things, succinctly
explained and easy to understand for those who know our writing and our language. The arrival of the
misfortune that threatened the earth was to take place at the moment when the heart of the Lion would be
in the first minute of the head of the Crab, while the planets would be at the following points of the
sky: the Sun and the Moon, at the first minute of the head of the Ram; Qouris at 1° 28' of the Ram; Raouis
at 29° 28' of the Whale; Aouis at 29° 3' of the Whale; Afrad and Batn at 28° and some minutes of the
Whale; Hermès at 27° and some minutes of the Whale, and El-Gouzher in the Balance, the apogee of the Moon
being at 5° and some minutes of the Lion. Then we studied what would happen after this catastrophe and
what the world would have to bear of calamities, and we discovered that the planets presaged a [...]

[PDF p. 369]

new scourge descending from the sky and that would be the very contrary of the first. This scourge would
be the fire that would set ablaze the four corners of the earth. In seeking the period at which this
catastrophe would occur, we saw that it would be at the moment when the heart of the Lion would be at the
last minute of the 15th degree of the Lion, and that Eilis would be, in the same minute, followed by
Qouris of the triangle of the Sagittarius, that Raouis-Jupiter would be at the beginning of the Lion at
the end of its evolution and with it Aouis, in the same minute that Salis would be in the Aquarius facing
Eilis-Sun and with it the tail in 22° (?). Then would occur a long eclipse of the Sun, the Moon walking
parallel to it; Hermès-Atared would be at its aphelion, having facing it the Moqabalin, Afrad and Batn
following the direct route, while Hermès would be on the return. The king asked: "Have you other
misfortunes to announce to us?" They said: "If the heart of the Lion is stopped at the ninth of its
revolution, there will remain on the earth no living being; all will be burned and will perish. If the
course of this star is achieved, the bonds that hold the sky will be broken and it will fall on the earth."
"And on what day will the displacement of the sky take place?" asked the king. "Two days after the
beginning of the movement of the firmament," they answered. Such was what was on the paper.

And when Sourid died, he was buried in the Eastern pyramid, Houheït in the Western pyramid, and Krours in
the pyramid whose base is in stone of Assouan and the summit in stone of Kaddan. These pyramids have
entrances made in underground vaults; the length of each corridor is 150 cubits. The door of the Eastern
pyramid opens to the north, that of the vault of the Western pyramid opens to the south. And in the
pyramids are heaped gold and emeralds in innumerable quantity.

The one who translated the Coptic book into Arabic made the calculation of the dates until the Sunday
first day of Thot (or first day of the rising of the sun) of the year 225 of the Arab years, and the
figure reached 4,321 solar years; then he calculated how many years had elapsed from the flood until that
day, and he found 1,741 years, 59 days, 13 hours, 56 minutes, 51 seconds, and subtracting this last number
from the first, he obtained as remainder 399 years, 205 days, [footnote: All this passage is incorrect in
the text of Boulaq and cannot lend itself to an exact interpretation.]

[PDF p. 370]

10 hours and 2 minutes and 1 second, by which he knew that the book in question had been written before
the flood, precisely the same number of years, days, hours, minutes, and seconds. [footnote: There is, in
the text of Boulaq, error in the data.]

As for the pyramid of the convent of Abou-Hermès, it is the tomb of Qarias, an Egyptian cavalier who was
worth by himself a thousand cavaliers. If he met a like number of cavaliers, these could not resist him
and took flight. At his death, the king made a great mourning and all the people were plunged in grief; he
was buried at the convent of Abou-Hermès, and over his tomb the stepped pyramid was built. The earth and
the stones that served for the construction come from the Fayoum, as it is easy to ascertain on
examination; one meets this earth indeed only in the Fayoum, and one finds no similar earth, neither at
Memphis nor at Ousim.

The tomb of the king under whom this Qarias lived is the great pyramid situated to the north of the
Deïr-Abou-Hermès. It has at its entrance a stele in stone of Kaddan, bearing an inscription in blue
letters; this stele has two cubits of height and one cubit of width, and is all covered with a writing
similar to that of the temples. One accedes to the door of the pyramid by steps of which some are still
completely intact. In this pyramid are accumulated the precious objects of its master, gold and emeralds;
but the door of it is obstructed by stones fallen from the summit, and if one climbs on these stones, one
sees on the other side a sort of chamber.

Ibn Afir reports, on the authority of his masters, that Giad ben Miad ben Shamr ben Sheddad ben 'Ad ben
Ous ben Arem ben Sam ben Nouh reigned at Alexandria, which was then called Aram Zat El-'Amad. His reign
was very long and lasted 300 years; it was he who, after his arrival in Egypt, constructed the pyramids
and wrote upon them: "I am Giad ben Miad ben Shamr ben Sheddad, the skillful sower of the valleys, inspired
by God in his way; it is I who gathered the rocks in the region, I the assembler of armies, the raiser of
columns, the destroyer of the ungrateful. (My tomb) will be discovered by a people who will have a prophet
of the name of Hamad, and that will happen when the country of countries (Egypt) is attacked by seven
chiefs of black tribes. The date of this inscription is 1,400 years."

[PDF p. 371]

Ibn Afir and Ibn Abd El-Hakem say: In the time of Sheddad ben 'Ad were built the pyramids, according to
what the historians recount, and we have found among none of the scholars of Egypt the profound knowledge
of the pyramids, nor certain notions.

Mohammed ben Abd Allah ben Abd El-Hakem says: I cannot believe that the pyramids were not constructed
before the flood; if they had been after, some people would know it.

Mohammed ben Shabremat El-Garhami says: The Amalekites, chased from Mecca by Garham, took refuge in Egypt
where they raised the pyramids, constructed fortresses, and edified all sorts of marvels; they remained in
Egypt until the moment when they were expelled from it by Malek ben Darr El-Khaza'i.

Mohammed ben Abd El-Hakem says: To the west of the pyramids were four hundred towns, without counting the
villages, from the frontier of Egypt to the Maghreb.

Ibn Afir says: Our old men of Egypt have always recognized that the pyramids had been built by Sheddad ben
'Ad; it is also this king who dug grottoes where treasures were buried (?). The people of that epoch
believed in the resurrection, and when an individual died, one buried with him all he possessed; if the
dead man was a worker, one buried with him the tools of his trade; the Sabeans made the pilgrimage of the
pyramids.

Abou-l-Rihan El-Birouni, in the book entitled Traces That Subsist of the Elapsed Centuries, says: The
Persians and the magi deny the flood; some Persians however admit it, but they claim that this cataclysm,
which occurred in the epoch of Timhurts, had effect only in Syria and in the West, and did not extend to
all the inhabited earth; according to them, it would not have passed (to the east) the wadi of Helouan and
would have left intact the empires of the East; as for the Westerners, forewarned of the disaster by their
sages, they would have raised constructions in the manner of the pyramids of Egypt, to take refuge there
at the moment of the cataclysm. The traces of the flood and the height attained by its waters are still
seen at mid-height of the pyramids, limits they could not pass. It is claimed that, when the waters of the
flood had withdrawn, one found, after the recession of the waters, only the village of Nehaouend, which
had remained absolutely similar to what

[PDF p. 372]

it was before, and the pyramids and the temples of Egypt; these had been built by the first Hermes, the
one the Arabs name Idris, to whom God had inspired the science of the stars, and who, in consulting them,
had foreseen the catastrophe that threatened the earth and would leave subsisting only some persons to
whom the knowledge of the sciences would be necessary. This is why, aided by the people of Egypt, he
raised the pyramids and the temples where he retraced the description of the sciences.

Abou-l-Solt El-Andalousi, in his opuscule, says in speaking of the character of the Egyptians: According
to the state of this people, it seems that there was among it a caste of scholars, and in particular of
architects and astronomers. This is proved by all they have left of marvelous constructions, such as the
pyramids and the temples, whose ruins overturn the most perspicacious mind and stupefy the most
clear-sighted imagination. One sees there the debris of a work that astonishes and confounds. Thus Abou-l-Ala
Ahmed ben Soliman El-Ma'ri was able to say in the poetry he composed on the death of his father:

[verses:] The firmest mind loses of its firmness, and the most upright judgment loses of its rectitude,
and the eloquent people, each time that they see a beautiful thing, regard it as the work of the genies.

And what more astonishing and more marvelous, after the power of God and the works of the Most High, than
the power that raised these gigantic constructions composed of colossal stones whose base is square, the
form conical, the height 319 cubits, and limited by four triangular faces whose bases are equal, each of
them being 460 cubits! And despite this enormous mass, thanks to the perfection of the work, to the
technical precision, to the beauty of the ensemble, they have nothing to fear from the breath of the winds
nor from the rain of the clouds, nor from the earthquakes. This description applies equally to each of the
two pyramids that rise facing Fostat on the western bank of the Nile, such as we have seen them, and which
are counted among the marvels of Egypt. And there exists in the world no monument for which the effects of
the days and the nights are not to be feared, except the pyramids which, according to me, are formidable
for the day and for the night. The

[PDF p. 373]

pyramids rise above the soil of Egypt, dominate its marshes, and sink into its atmosphere. It is of them
that Abou-l-Taïb El-Moutanabbi wished to speak in these verses:

[verses:] Where is the one who built the two pyramids? What is his people? When did he live? When did he
die? The monuments survive some time those who inhabited them, then, struck by annihilation, like them they
disappear.

One day we had gone to the pyramids, and after having made the circuit of them and examined them well, our
admiration redoubled, and one of us said:

[verses:] By your life! What have you seen more marvelous in all that you have seen than the pyramids of
Egypt? Raised toward the sky and plunging into the atmosphere higher than the phoenix and the eagle, they
stand upright, dominating the earth like two breasts raised on a chest.

It is claimed that the pyramids are the tombs of illustrious kings who wished to distinguish themselves
thus after their death, as they had distinguished themselves during their life, and to render their memory
imperishable during the duration of the centuries and the length of the ages.

When the caliph Al-Mamoun came to Egypt, he gave the order to open one of the pyramids; one attacked one
of those that face Fostat; after unheard-of pains and a considerable fatigue, one arrived in the interior
of the pyramid, which one found all sown with wells and arduous ramps; the passage was perilous; finally,
at the end was a cubic chamber of about 8 cubits on a side. In the middle of the chamber was a vat of
marble closed with a lid that was removed; and one found in the vat only a cadaver corrupted as a
consequence of the length of the centuries. Al-Mamoun then prescribed opening no other pyramid, the
expense made for the opening of this breach having been, it is asserted, extraordinarily considerable.

Some think that the first Hermes, the one surnamed the Triple, because of the three gifts he possessed --
prophecy, royalty, and wisdom -- is the same as the one the Hebrews name Khanoukh (Enoch) ben Bared ben
Mahlaïl ben Fatian ben [...]

[PDF p. 374]

Anouch ben Seth ben Adam; it is the same as Idris. He foresaw, according to the position of the planets,
the arrival of a flood that would submerge the entire earth; he therefore had constructed a great number
of pyramids where treasures were deposited, books of science, and all that he feared to see annihilated
and disappear and that he wished to guarantee from destruction. It is also said that their constructor was
a king named Sourid ben Sahlouq ben Siriaq. According to others, the personage who raised the pyramids
situated facing Fostat would have been Sheddad ben 'Ad, who would have constructed them following a dream.
The Copts, who contest the invasion of the Amalekites in Egypt, attribute the construction of these
monuments to Sourid, also following a dream announcing to him that a calamity would descend from the sky;
it is a question there of the flood. Sourid, say the Copts, raised the two pyramids in the space of six
months, covered them with multicolored brocade, and engraved this inscription: "I have built them in six
months: tell those who come after me to destroy them in 600 years; yet it is easier to demolish than to
construct. I have covered them with brocade of color; let my successors cover them with mats; yet mats are
more common than brocade." We have examined the faces of these pyramids, they are cut with longitudinal
lines forming narrow and parallel bands all filled with a writing very visible but that one no longer
knows how to read and whose signification one no longer understands. In sum, it is a work so marvelous that
to wish to describe it in detail and with precision would be the contrary of what Aly ben Abbas El-Roumi
recommends, although there is no point of resemblance between the two objects, which are on the contrary
very different:

[verses:] If you wish to describe something, do not exaggerate, diminish rather; if you exaggerate, it
gives one to think that you stray much from the truth; and one will diminish in proportion to how much you
have exaggerated, to bring back what one has not seen to what one knows.

It is reported that El-Mamoun had a man mount on the great pyramid provided with a rope 1,000 royal cubits
long, each of which is worth 1 cubit and two fifths. The perimeter of the base, each face being equal, was
400 cubits for each face. It took to mount on the pyramid three hours

[PDF p. 375]

of day, and the man on reaching the summit found that it terminated in a plateau of a surface equal to the
place eight kneeling camels would occupy.

The bodies buried in the pyramid were, it is said, wrapped in cloths gnawed by time and of which there
remained only the threads of gold; the drugs with which they were impregnated formed a mass of myrrh and
aloes of the thickness of a span.

It is recounted that one discovered, in a certain place of these pyramids, a vaulted portico pierced with
three doors giving into three chambers. Each door had 10 cubits of height by 5 of width; it was of marble
cut and perfectly fitted, and on the lintel was traced an inscription of blue color, indecipherable. One
spent three days trying to open these doors; at the end one noticed, about 10 cubits facing them, three
columns of marble in each of which was a hole dug toward the summit; each hole contained the statue of a
different bird: in the first column the image of a dove in green stone; in that of the center the image of
a vulture in yellow stone; in the third the image of a cock in red stone. One displaced the vulture and
the door facing it displaced itself; one lifted the vulture and the door lifted itself likewise, and it
was so heavy that a hundred men would not have succeeded in carrying it. One removed the two other statues
and the two other doors lifted themselves. One penetrated into the central chamber in which were three
beds of transparent and luminous stone and on these three beds three bodies covered with three robes, and
near the head of each of them a book in unknown characters. In the second chamber were arranged quantities
of stone shelves supporting stone baskets containing vases of gold of a marvelous work and incrusted with
precious stones. In the third chamber were also found shelves and stone baskets in which were deposited
instruments of war and a great number of arms. One of the swords was measured, it had no less than seven
spans; one of the cuirasses measured eighteen spans. Al-Mamoun had all that had been found in these
chambers carried off, then the birds having been put back in their place, the three doors closed again and
resumed their former position.

The number of the pyramids amounted, it is said, to eighteen, of which three facing

[PDF p. 376]

Ghizeh; the greatest of these has a perimeter of 2,000 cubits; it is square and each of its sides is 500
cubits. Al-Mamoun, having opened it, found there, it is said, a vat of stone closed with a slab and filled
with gold; on the lid was an inscription that was translated into Arabic and signified: "We have made this
pyramid in a thousand days; we give another a thousand years to destroy it, and one knows that it is
easier to demolish than to construct. We have hung it entirely with brocade, let another try to hang it
with mats; it is however easier to procure mats than brocade. And on each side we have deposited a sum
equal to that which will be spent to arrive this far." Al-Mamoun having had the count established of what
had been spent to penetrate this far, one found in the vat an equivalent sum, neither more nor less.

It is recounted again that he found there a statue of a man in green stone similar to the daheng, closed
with a lid in stone similar to the adouat; when the lid was withdrawn, one found in the statue the body of
a man clad in a cuirass of gold ornamented with precious stones, and on his chest was extended a long
sword of an inestimable price; near his head was a red ruby as big as a hen's egg. Al-Mamoun took it,
saying: "This is worth more than gold." Some Egyptian chroniclers affirm that the green statue where this
body was found remained standing near the palace of the king in the town of Masr until the year 611 [13
May 1214 to 1 May 1215] of the hijra.

Near the town of Far'oun (Pharaoh) were two pyramids, and near Meïdoum was another, the last.

In the year 579 [26 April 1183 to 13 April 1184] of the hijra one discovered on the territory of Busir,
province of Ghizeh, the house of Hermes. The qadi Ibn El-Shahrzouri opened it and drew from it all sorts
of things: rams, monkeys, frogs in bezoar, vases in daheng, and statues of bronze.

Ibn Khordadabah says regarding the Marvels of the Constructions: The two pyramids of Egypt each have a
thickness of 400 cubits, and the more they rise, the more they narrow. Both are of alabaster and marble;
their height is 400 cubits by 400 cubits of width, and on their faces

[PDF p. 377]

have been retraced by hand all the art of magic and all the marvelous secrets of medicine; there is in
addition this inscription: "I, I built them; let the king who proclaims himself powerful destroy them; and
to destroy is easier than to construct!" One has established the estimate of the expenses necessary for
this work and one has recognized that the revenues of the whole world could not have sufficed for it.

In the book entitled Marvels of the Constructions, it is said, regarding the pyramids: This kind of
construction is particular to Egypt, and one finds nowhere else anything similar. One would imagine, in
seeing them, that they are the two breasts of Egypt, and the stranger who penetrates into this country
could imagine that they were put there by the generosity of the inhabitants as a sign of hospitality. If
one sees them only from afar and one is told some facts that concern them, one imagines that they are
fables. The accounts that relate to the pyramids, to their description, to their measures abound. They are
very numerous; all on the territory of Ghizeh and on a line passing through Masr el-Qadima and long three
days of march. At Abou-Sir there are many. Some are great, others small; some are of earth, others of
bricks, but the greatest number is of stone; some are stepped, others with smooth faces.

There were still at Ghizeh a great number of very small pyramids; but, in the time of the sultan Salah
el-Din Youssef ben Ayoub, they were destroyed by the eunuch Baha el-Din Qarâqoûsh, who employed the
materials of them for the construction of the bridges of Ghizeh. Of these pyramids there remain no more
than hills of rubble.

As for the pyramids of which one always speaks, they are the three pyramids that are situated at Ghizeh,
directly facing Fostat; there is between them a certain distance, and each of them presents one of its
angles to the east. Two are very great and of the same dimension, they are near one another and built in
white stones; the third is smaller than the two others by about a quarter, but it is built in spotted rose
granite, of an extraordinary force and solidity and on which the iron itself leaves a trace only with
great difficulty. In comparison with the two others it seems small; but, if one looks at it in isolation
and abstracting from the two others, the sight is frightened and the gaze is troubled to examine it.

[PDF p. 378]

In the construction of the pyramids a truly admirable method was followed, both for the form given to the
monument and for the perfection of the execution; thus they have borne with impunity the passage of time,
while time has had difficulty bearing their duration. In examining them closely, one sees that superior
minds exhausted themselves, that subtle intelligences surpassed themselves, that luminous souls spent for
them all the genius they possessed, and that masters in art edified them as proof of their power, to such a
point that they seem to speak of the superiority of the people who built them, that they recount its
history, set forth its science and its intelligence, and deliver to us something of its life and its
chronicles; and this because they gave the pyramids the form of a cone with a square base and terminated
in a point. One of the particularities of the cone is that the center of gravity is found in the middle,
that the faces lean one on the other, penetrating and supporting one another, for there exists no other
side on which they can lean. The square form has this remarkable, that the breath of the four winds comes
to strike against an angle; now the wind breaks on an angle, which does not happen if it meets a plane
surface.

The geometers claim that the base of each of the two great pyramids has 400 cubits, in black cubits, and
that the platform of the summit presents a surface of 10 cubits on a side. It is recounted that an archer
having launched an arrow toward the summit of one of these pyramids, his arrow did not even reach the
middle of the monument. It is also said that the platform of the summit forms a square of 11 cubits on a
side, in natural cubits, and that one of these pyramids possesses a door by which one can penetrate and
which leads the visitors to narrow paths, to abrupt underground passages, to wells, precipices, etc.; it
is at least what some of those who have visited it report. Many people, pushed by curiosity, do not cease
to enter and descend into the depths, but, without any doubt, they would end by arriving at some place
without exit. As for the cleared and beaten path, it is a ramp that leads to the summit where one meets a
square chamber enclosing a naos of stone; this path was not traced by the constructors, it was pierced by
chance, and it is said that it was Al-Mamoun who had it opened.

People who have followed this route and mounted to the summit have [...]

[PDF p. 379]

recounted, on their return, having seen extraordinary things: the chamber is filled with bats and
encumbered with their filth; these animals attain the size of a pigeon; near the summit are also seen
windows and dormers intended to let pass the air and the light; these openings are cut in enormous stones
measuring each from 10 to 20 cubits of length by 2 to 3 cubits of width and as much of thickness.

What is most marvelous is the admirable arrangement of the superposed stones; it is impossible to do
better, to such a point that between two stones we could not succeed in introducing either a needle or
even a hair. Between the stones is spread an earth of blue color whose nature and composition one is
ignorant of, and on the surface of the stones are traced inscriptions in unknown antique characters; no
one in Egypt has heard it said that anyone understood them. These inscriptions are so numerous and so
extensive that if one transported them onto paper, they would cover ten thousand sheets. I have read, in
certain old Sabean books, that one of these pyramids was the tomb of Adamoun and the other the tomb of
Hermès; according to them, these two personages would have been great prophets, and Adamoun would have
been the greatest; one made the pilgrimage of the pyramids and came there from the depths of all
countries.

The king El-Aziz Othman ben Salah El-Din Youssef ben Ayoub, who reigned after his father, was pushed by
ignorant people of his court to destroy the pyramids. He began with the small red pyramid and sent there
quarriers, stonecutters, under the conduct of some emirs of the kingdom and great ones of the empire,
intimating to them the order to destroy it. These planted their tents near the pyramid, gathered laborers
and workers, and did not spare the expense; they stayed there nearly eight months with their people and
their horses, destroying each day one or two stones with infinite pains and after unheard-of efforts. Men
posted at the top lifted with levers the stone that others pulled from below by means of ropes and cables.
The stone in falling made a frightful noise that was heard from very far, the mountains started at it and
the earth trembled from it; the stone sank into the sand, and new efforts were needed to lift it by means
of levers in order to dig beneath it a path on which it was made to roll; then it was broken into heaps,
and each piece was carried on carts and thrown at the foot of

[PDF p. 380]

the neighboring mountain. And after very long efforts and enormous expenses, exhausted with fatigue and at
the end of their strength, they saw themselves obliged to abandon the work without having been able to
accomplish it; all they obtained was to disfigure the pyramid and give a proof of their impotence and the
inanity of their efforts. This happened in 593 [24 November 1196 to 12 November 1197]. Today, if one looks
at the heap of stones torn from the pyramid, one might believe that it is completely destroyed; but if one
examines the pyramid itself, one remains convinced that nothing has been removed from it and that only a
part of the flanks has crumbled. A personage who had been witness to the trouble experienced in demolishing
each stone asked the chief of the workers: "If the sultan gave you a thousand dinars to put one of these
stones back in its place and such as it was, could you do it?" "No, by God," answered the other, "it would
be impossible for us, even if the sum were doubled."

Facing the pyramids are numerous grottoes, so great and so deep that a cavalier could enter there with
lance in hand and ride for an entire day without reaching the bottom, so high, spacious, and deep are
they; according to their situation, it seems that these are the quarries from which the stones of the
pyramids were extracted.

As for the quarries that furnished the stones of the red pyramid, they are situated, it is said, at Qolzoum
and at Assouan. Near these pyramids one still sees the vestiges of superb constructions and of numerous
grottoes cut in the rock; it is very rare that there are not found in these grottoes inscriptions in this
unknown language (of which we have spoken); and the jurist Amarat El-Yenini drank at the same breast as
God when he said:

[verses:] O my friends! there is not, under the sky, a construction that equals in perfection the two
pyramids of Egypt; it is an edifice that time dreads, and yet all that is on the surface of the earth
dreads time. The eye is ravished by the beauty of their arrangement, and the mind could not seize the aim
of their construction.

This thought is drawn from the words of a sage: Every thing fears time, except the pyramids, for time, on
the contrary, fears them.

[PDF p. 381]

Abd El-Ouaheb ben Hassan ben Gafar ben El-Hageb, who died in 387 [14 January 997 to 2 January 998], said:

[verses:] Contemplate the two pyramids when they point, before the eyes, their summit in the height and
the extent; as if the vast earth had had thirst because of the long heat of its liver, it has uncovered
its two prominent breasts, invoking God because it is separated from its child. And God heard it and gave
it the Nile to console it by watering it, and to make it forget its pain, thanks to the generosity of the
lord who directs it, who leads the people toward improvement, and organizes the affairs.

Seïf El-Din ben Gobarat said:

[verses:] By God! What marvels, what admirable things the two pyramids say to the hearts! The history of
their people is mute to the ears, but they lift the veil and show us innumerable beauties; they are like
tents raised without pole or ropes.

Another said:

[verses:] Look at the two pyramids and learn from them what they recount of the times past; contemplate
the shadowy mystery they enclose, contemplating it with the eye of the heart, not with the gaze. If they
spoke, they would recount to us what was done at the beginning and at the end of time. When they begin to
point before the eye that looks at them, they seem the two ears of a buried horse.

The imam Abou-l-Abbas Ahmed ben Youssef El-Tifachi said:

[verses:] Have you not seen the pyramids whose construction persists while the law of the world makes men
and genies disappear? Like a mill, of which the upper millstone would be the sky, the lower millstone the
pyramids, and the world the grinding.

[PDF p. 382]

He said again:

[verses:] The people of old who inhabited Egypt were strong. Virtue is a remnant of them, and science for
them was a banner; but their banners have fallen, and their science and they are extinguished; look, you
will see it visible, old age upon it is sensible.

One has said:

[verses:] O my friends, nothing resists the two accidents (the day and the night); if a first thing had
subsisted, a second would subsist; the two pyramids of Egypt are the supreme point attained by the force
of man, and the two pyramids have aged with their time. Do not be astonished to see me age, for time has
thrown me into the loss of my youth. Go to Carthage and contemplate there the monuments of the Adites and
you will weep; and the portico of Cosroes (Chosroes), contemplate it, it will speak of all the times, as
with sincerity. And do not believe that death is particular to me, far from it! all that is on the globe is
perishable.

I found this written in the hand of the cheikh Shehab el-Din Ahmed ben Yahia ben Abou Heglat El-Tlemsani:
The cadi Fakhr El-Din Abd el-Ouahab El-Masri recited to me verses he had composed in 655 on the pyramids
and that are excellent:

[verses:] The construction of the pyramids is like a preacher who would touch the hearts without using
speech. Behold there comes to my mind a very ancient word: "Where is the one who raised the pyramids?"
They are elevated mountains and that are almost more elevated above the earth than Saturn. If Cosroes had
had their flank for a throne, he would have preferred it to the throne of his portico. They have passed
through the heat and the cold of time for very long, and have felt nothing of these two things,

[PDF p. 383]

[verses, continued:] neither of the burning sun, nor of the wind that blows, nor of the torrent that
flows. Did a pious man raise them in testimony of his piety, and did he build the pyramids for some one of
his idols? Or is it the work of a man believing in the return of the soul toward the body after having
left it? And did he build them for his treasures and for his cadaver, like a tomb that was to preserve them
from the flood? Or are they observatories for the planets chosen by the observers because of the excellence
of the place? Or are they the description of planetary calculations, such as the Persians and the Greeks
made formerly? Or has there been engraved on their faces a science that the mind strives to understand? In
the heart of whoever sees them, to know their writing, there surges a desire that makes one bite the tip
of the fingers.

[PDF p. 384]

CHAPTER XLI
OF THE STATUE NAMED "THE TERRIBLE"

This statue is situated between the two pyramids and was formerly called Belheïb; today the Egyptians name
it Abou-l-hôl (the father of terror).

El-Qoda'ï says: The statue of the pyramids, named Belhoubah, is a colossal statue in stone, situated
between the two pyramids, and of which one sees only the head. The common people give it the name of
Abou-l-hôl; it is also called Belheïb. It is, it is said, a talisman against the sands and that prevents
them from invading the cultivated terrains of Gizeh.

In the book Marvels of the Constructions, it is said: Near the pyramids, one sees, emerging from the soil,
a head and a neck of colossal grandeur; the people give to this figure the name of Abou-l-hôl and claim
that the rest of the body is buried under the sand. Proportionally to the dimensions of the head, the total
length of the body must be 70 cubits and even more. The face is painted in red and covered with a brilliant
varnish perfectly conserved. The figure is beautiful, the features agreeable and imprinted with charm and
beauty; the face seems to smile.

One questioned an eminent man on what he had seen most marvelous: "The proportion of the face of
Abou-l-hôl," he answered. Indeed, the different parts of the face, the nose, the eyes, the ears, are as
well proportioned as the features one meets in nature. The nose of the child, for example, is in proportion
to his size, and this nose, which renders him beautiful, would render hideous a man who had it in the
middle of his face; likewise, a child would be hideous if he had the nose of a man. It would be the same
for any one whatever of the parts of the body. It is therefore necessary that all the members be
proportioned to the rest of the body and to its size. What is admirable in the artist who executed the
statue of Abou-l-hôl is that he was able, despite the enormity

[PDF p. 385]

of the monument, to conserve the proportions of the members, although nature has never created a body of
this dimension.

Facing this statue, on the territory of Masr near the royal palace, was found a second, of colossal size
likewise and perfectly proportioned like the first. In its lap it holds a child and on its head is placed
a basin; the whole is of a single block of granite. It is claimed that it is a woman, the spouse of
Abou-l-hôl of whom we have spoken. She is found in a street to which she has given her name. It is asserted
that if one put on the head of Abou-l-hôl the extremity of a thread and that, the thread stretched, the
other extremity rested on the head of the woman, one would obtain a line exactly horizontal. Abou-l-hôl is,
it is said, a talisman destined to prevent the sands from joining the Nile, and the woman is another
talisman whose virtue is to prevent the waters of the Nile from inundating the town of Masr.

Ibn el-Moutaouag says: The lane of the Statue is a lane that begins at the extremity of the Great Market,
in the vicinity of the street of 'Amar. The idol is known under the name of woman of Pharaoh and is
regarded as a talisman destined to preserve the countryside from the invasion of the waters of the Nile.
It is said that the Belheïb of the pyramids faces her, the back of Belheïb being turned toward the desert,
while the back of the woman is turned toward the river, the two statues facing the east. In 711 [20 May
1311 to 8 May 1312] an emir, of the name of Balât, arrived with workers, stonecutters and quarriers; they
broke the statue known under the name of statue of the Woman and cut it into large and small pieces,
thinking that beneath must be hidden a treasure, but one found there only a pedestal of enormous stone
under which one dug until one met the water, but one discovered nothing. With these stones one constructed
the base of the granite column that one can see in the new mosque built outside Masr and that one calls
the New Mosque of El-Naser; it is thus that this statue disappeared, and God is the most learned!

In our time, a personage, the cheikh Mohammed Saïm El-Daher, one of the Sons of the convent of dervishes
founded by Saïd El-Sa'ada, set out

[PDF p. 386]

toward 780 [30 April 1378 to 18 April 1379] in order to combat and destroy the superstitions; he went to
the pyramids and mutilated the face of Abou-l-hôl, which has remained in this state until the present.
Since then, the sand has invaded in great part the territory of Gizeh, and the inhabitants of this
province attribute this encroachment of the sands on their lands to the mutilation of the statue. To God is
the consequence of things, and what more beautiful than what Zâfer El-Haddad said:

[verses:] Examine the form of the two pyramids and admire; between the two is Abou-l-hôl the marvelous.
Like travelers who, the night having passed, are going to depart, beloved with beloved, between the two of
them stands the jealous one. And the water of the Nile, at their feet, is like tears; and the voice of the
wind, which blows near them, is like a lament. And the prison of Joseph appears like a lover abandoned, and
who sadly laments.

It is recounted that Atrib ben Qobt ben Masr ben Beïsar ben Ham ben Nouh, at the moment of dying, recommended
to his brother Sa to put his body in a boat and bury it in an island in the middle of the river. When he
was dead, Sa executed the order of his brother, without any Egyptian having knowledge of it. Sa was accused
of the murder of Atrib, and there formed against him an uprising that lasted nine years. At the end of the
fifth year, Sa proposed to the rebels to lead them to the tomb of Atrib; they went there, but, after having
dug his tomb, found no more the body, which the demons had transported to the place where Abou-l-hôl is, to
bury it near the tomb of his father and his grandfather Beïsar. The suspicions from then on only increased
against Sa, and the rebels, returned to Memphis, continued the war. Eblis (the Devil) went to them and
showed them the body of Atrib where he had transported it. One drew Atrib from his tomb and placed him on a
bed; and the demon spoke to them by his tongue (Atrib's), subjected them to his ideas, so much so that one
prostrated oneself before him and adored him as one had adored the idols. Sa was killed and his body buried
on the bank of the Nile; but the Nile, in rising, did not submerge his tomb. Seeing which, a part of the
rebels rallied to him, declaring that he had been killed unjustly, and went to prostrate themselves on his
tomb as the others did for

[PDF p. 387]

Atrib; some cut a stone and gave it the form of Achmoum. This stone, called later Abou-l-hôl, was placed
between the two pyramids and became an object of veneration: there were thus three sects in Egypt. And the
Sabeans never ceased to venerate Abou-l-hôl, to sacrifice to him white cocks and to burn for him
sandarac.

[PDF p. 388]

CHAPTER XLII
OF THE MOUNTAINS

The whole land of Egypt is embraced by two mountains that run from south to north; very little elevated,
they are of unequal height, that of the east being the highest; it bears the name of mount Louqa; the
mountain of the west, rather low, is not continuous. The space that separates these two mountains is very
narrow in certain places and widens in certain others. The widest part is found in the Delta. These two
mountains are sterile and produce no plant, contrary to the mountains of other countries. The cause of it
is that they are saturated with niter and salt, for the force of the silt of Egypt attracts to itself the
humidity of these mountains, a humidity necessary to germination, and the excessive heat eliminates from
it the sweet and subtle substance; thus the water of the wells of these mountains is salty. These two
mountains dry up what one buries in them, because the rains are naturally rare in Egypt.

Mount Louqa, situated to the east of Egypt, protects it against the east wind; thus this wind is
absolutely lacking in Egypt. Moreover, it intercepts for this country the rays of the rising sun when it is
still near the horizon. The names of these two mountains are very numerous and vary according to the
provinces they traverse. The one that dominates Fostat and El-Qahira is the mount Moqattam.

[PDF p. 389]

CHAPTER XLIII
OF MOUNT MOQATTAM

Mount Moqattam begins at the east of China, at the Enveloping Ocean, traverses the country of the Tatars,
reaches Farganah and the mounts Yetam where the river Soghd takes its source, and extends to the Gihoun
(Oxus); this river cuts the mountain in two and flows between its two sections; the mountain, which seems
there cut in its middle, resumes beyond the Gihoun the direction of Gourgan and, passing by Talkhan,
traverses the provinces of Merv and of Roud until Tous. All the towns of the district of Tous are situated
in this mountain, to which are attached the mountains of Ispahan and of Shiraz before it reaches the
Indian Ocean. There, the mountain makes a bend in the direction of Sharzour, passes the Tigris, and reaches
mount Goudi where the ark of Noah stopped at the time of the flood. Then, traversing the provinces of Amad
and of Miafaraqeïn, it reaches the frontier post of Aleppo and there takes the name of mount Lakam. After
having passed Aleppo, it takes until Homs the name of Nahra; beyond Homs, one designates it by the name of
mount Liban (Lebanon). From there, traversing Syria, it reaches the (eastern) shore of the sea of Qolzoum.
On the other side (on the western shore), it takes the name of Moqattam. At this point, it divides into
several branches whose last ones go to die at the extremity of the west. It is claimed that its name comes
to it from Moqtam ben Masr ben Beïsar ben Ham ben Nouh.

Mount Moqattam lodges the two banks of the Nile in the direction of Nubia, passes above the Fayoum, and
reaches to the west the territory of Mouqraouat and farther west still Sagalmasat, whence it directs itself
toward the Enveloping Ocean, which it reaches after five months of march.

Ibrahim ben Ouacif Shah, speaking of the arrival of Misraïm ben Beïsar ben Ham ben Nouh in the country of
Egypt, says: The companions of the priest Aqlimoun

[PDF p. 390]

brought to light the treasures of the Egyptians and their manuscripts, enclosing the sciences set forth in
berabi writing; they cleared their monuments and found again the mines of gold, emeralds, and turquoises,
etc. They reestablished the description of the arts -- that is, of alchemy. And Misraïm instituted as chief
of alchemy a man of the sacerdotal caste named Moqaïtâm the sage, who exercised his art on the eastern
mountain, which took from him the name of Moqattam, because Moqaïtâm the sage practiced alchemy there. The
name of the sage was abbreviated, and this abbreviation served to designate the mountain, which was called
mount Moqattam -- that is, mountain of Moqaïtâm the sage.

El-Bakri says: The Moqattam is a mountain that borders Masr and where one buries the dead.

El-Qoda'ï says: The Moqattam, according to Abou Abd Allah El-Yemani, is this mountain attributed to
Moqattam ben Masr ben Beïsar ben Ham ben Nouh, who was a pious servant of God and who withdrew to this
mountain to give himself over to his devotions; whence the mountain would have taken its name. But that is
not exact, for one knows at Masr no son of the name of Moqattam.

Here now is what the scholars recount: The name of Moqattam is derived from the word equivalent to "to
cut"; indeed, it would seem that one had cut all the trees and all the plants of this mountain, whence the
name of Moqattam. It is at least what Ali ben El-Hassan El-Henaï El-Doussi surnamed Kara' and others still
claim.

Abd El-Rahman ben Abd Allah ben Abd El-Hakem recounts, on the authority of El-Leïtz ben Sa'd, that
El-Maqoqos asked Amr ben El-As to sell him the foot of the Moqattam for 70,000 dinars according to some,
20,000 dinars only according to others. Amr, astonished, said to him: "I will refer it to the Commander of
the Faithful." And he wrote indeed on this subject to Omar ben El-Khattab, who answered him: "Ask him why
he made you such a proposition for a mountain that cannot be cultivated and where one cannot procure
water." Amr questioned Maqoqos, and the latter said to him: "We have found in the books the description of
this mountain, and we have seen that it would enclose the plants of Paradise." Amr transmitted this
explanation to Omar, who answered: "As for plants of Paradise, I know only the Muslims. Bury then in this
mountain

[PDF p. 391]

the Muslims who die in the country where you are, and sell it at no price." And the first Muslim buried
there was a man of the tribe of Mo'afar named 'Amer, and from then on the mountain was peopled (cultivated)
[footnote: play on words on the word that signifies "to people, to cultivate"]. And El-Maqoqos cried:
"What! that is not conformable to our treaty!" And one traced the limit that separates the property of the
Copts from the cemetery (of the Muslims).

Omar ben Abou Omar El-Kandi, speaking of the merits of Egypt, recounts that Amr ben El-As, having gone to
the foot of the Moqattam, asked El-Maqoqos who accompanied him: "What is the matter with your mountain to
be thus sterile; no plants grow there as in the mountains of Syria. What if we had a canal dug that would
bring there the water of the Nile and if we planted palms there?" "We have found in the books," answered
El-Maqoqos, "that this mountain was, more than any other, fertile in trees, in plants, and in fruits. It
was the abode of Moqattam son of Masr son of Beïsar son of Cham son of Noah. And when came the night when
God spoke to Moses, God said to the mountains: I am going to speak with one of my prophets on one of you.
All the mountains stood up and raised themselves, except the mountain of Jerusalem, which lowered itself
and made itself quite small. God asked it: Why have you acted thus? and he knew it better than anyone. The
mountain answered: By veneration and respect for you, O my Lord. And God then prescribed the other
mountains to give it all the plants they possessed. And the Moqattam gave all the plants that covered it,
and since that epoch it has remained stripped as you see it at present. God then said to the Moqattam: In
recompense for what you have done, I will give you the trees of Paradise, or, according to another version,
the plants of Paradise." Amr wrote all this to Omar ben El-Khattab, who answered him: "I know, as for plants
of Paradise, only the Muslims. Make them then a cemetery of this mountain." El-Maqoqos, irritated, said to
Amr: "That is not in our conventions." And Amr reserved for him a terrain on the side of El-Habech, where
the Christians were buried. It is recounted that Moses having prostrated himself, all the trees of the
Moqattam as far as Tourah prostrated themselves with him.

It is written: "When the holy country will be conquered"; by that is understood the valley of

[PDF p. 392]

the Adoration of Moses in the Moqattam, near the quarry of stones. For Moses spoke to his Master in this
valley.

Abd ben Mousa says: I was attending a burial with Mousa ben Lahi'at; we were near the dead man when Mousa,
raising the head, looked at the mountain saying: "Jesus, son of Mary, passed at the foot of this mountain
clad in a caftan of wool and girded with a ribbon; his mother was near him, and Jesus, turning toward her,
said to her: O my mother, here is the cemetery of the people of Mohammed."

Abd Allah ben Lahi'at reports, on the authority of 'Yach ben Abbas, that Ka'b el-Ahbar asked a man who was
going to Egypt to bring him back some dust taken from the foot of the Moqattam. The latter brought it back
to him in a sack, and when Ka'b died one placed, according to his orders, this dust in his coffin, under
his body.

It is reported that Ka'b, questioned on the mountain of Egypt, answered: "It is sacred from Qoseïr to
El-Yahmoum."

Ibn Lahi'at says: The Moqattam is the mountain comprised between Qoseïr and the quarry of stones (Tourah);
from this point, it takes the name of Yahmim; one finds there precious stones and steel (?), and it
extends to the extremities of the country of the Blacks.

[PDF p. 393]

CHAPTER XLIV
OF THE RED MOUNTAIN

This mountain, which dominates Cairo to the northeast, is known under the name of Yahmoum.

El-Qoda'ï says: The Yahamim are diverse mountains that dominate Cairo and its countryside on the side of
the east; they terminate at a certain road of the Cistern. One gives them the name of Yahamim because of
the variety of their colors. El-Yahmoum in Arabic signifies black, dark.

Ibn Abd El-Hakem reports, on the authority of Sa'ï ben Obeïd, that, at the time of his journey to Masr, the
inhabitants had established their place of prayer in a place situated facing the saqieh of Abou 'Oun in the
quarter of El-Asker, and he asked: Why have they established their place of prayer on the cursed mountain
and abandoned the holy mountain -- that is, the Moqattam?

Ibn Abd El-Zaher says: The red mountain, according to El-Qoda'ï, is the Yahmoum that dominates Cairo, and I
see indeed no mountain dominating Cairo other than that one.

El-Bakri says: El-Yahmoum, with a fatha on the first letter, a soukoun on the second. El-Harbi says:
El-Yahmoum, mountain of Egypt.

Abou Qabil reports that Abdallah ben Amr, questioning Ka'b on the subject of the Moqattam, asked him if it
was cursed. "Far from being cursed," answered Ka'b, "it is sacred from Qoseïr to El-Yahmoum."

El-Bakri reports again that Abed is a mountain of Egypt facing the Moqattam.

[PDF p. 394]

CHAPTER XLV
OF THE MOUNTAIN OF YACHKOUR

This mountain is found between Cairo and Masr, and it is on it that the mosque of Touloun is built.

El-Qoda'ï says: Mountain of Yachkour; this Yachkour was son of Gadelat of the tribe of Lakhm. It is on
this mountain that rises the mosque of Ibn Touloun. The Yachkar ben Gadelat are a small Arab tribe that,
at the moment of the conquest, settled on this mountain, which took from them the name of Yachkour.

Ibn Abd El-Zaher says: The mosque of Ibn Touloun is built on the mountain of Yachkour; it is a place
celebrated for its miracles and a blessed place. It is said that it is on this mountain that Moses opened
his mouth to speak to his Lord. It dominates the Nile, from which nothing separates it. It dominates also
the two ponds, the Birket el-Fil (pond of the Elephant) and the pond of Qaroun. It is also on this mountain
that the machines of war were tested before their dispatch to the frontier posts.

El-Kabch is a mountain situated in the vicinity of the Yachkour and that dominated formerly the course of
the Nile, to the west. Then when, after the conquest, the Muslims had founded Fostat, this mountain was
included in the quarter of El-Hamra el-Qousoua, which took the name of Kabch.

El-Sharf is the name of three places: two are found between Cairo and Masr and the third between the Birket
el-Habech and Fostat Masr. For those situated outside Cairo, one of them, on which rises today the Citadel
of the Mountain, forms part of the Moqattam; the second is situated between Masr and the mosque of Touloun;
this one dominates to the west the great canal that separates Kom el-Gareh and the quarter of the mosque of
Touloun;

[PDF p. 395]

it formed part of the quarter of Tagib, but was later attached to the quarter of El-Asker.

As for the third Sharf, it bears today the name of El-Rased (the observatory) and dominates the quarter of
Rashidat. This Sharf bore the name of Sanad, and sanad is the name one gives to the part of a mountain that
one has before oneself and that is above the soil. One says [Arabic] to say "leaning."

[PDF p. 396]

CHAPTER XLVI
OF THE OBSERVATORY (EL-RASED)

El-Rased is an elevation that dominates to the west the quarter of Rashidat and to the south the Birket
el-Habech; for whoever looks at it from the side of Rashidat it is a veritable mountain, but for whoever
comes from the side of the east it seems a plateau, and one can indeed reach it without climbing, by
passing through the cemetery. This hill faces the Sharf of the quarter of El-Askar and the Sharf that
bears today the name of Kabch. It was formerly called the Garf, but it took subsequently the name of Rased
(observatory) after El-Afdal Abou-l-Qasem Shanshah, son of the general Badr el-Gemali, had installed at its
summit a sphere to observe the planets. From then on it bore the name of Rased.

In the book Of Observation, it is said: There were brought from Syria to El-Afdal Shanshah, son of the
general Bedr, a hundred tables on which were inscribed the (astronomical) events that were to occur in the
years subsequent to the year 500 [2 September 1106 to 21 August 1107] of the hijra. The astronomers of His
Excellence were then Ibn El-Halebi, Ibn El-Heitzmi, Sahloun, and others to whom were accorded a monthly
salary, plus an (annual) pension and garments, and who were charged with establishing also tables each
year. Each of them gave himself over to his personal calculations and to the operations for which he had
the most aptitude. At the beginning of the year each brought his tables. In comparing them with those
brought from Syria, one found between them notable divergences, which displeased the sultan. Thus at the
beginning of the year 513 [14 April 1119 to 1 April 1120], when the tables were gathered, according to
custom, El-Afdal convoked the astronomers, the calculators, and the scholars and asked them the reason for
the discrepancies the tables presented. "The Syrians," it was answered, "observe and calculate according to
the

[PDF p. 397]

method today abandoned of El-Mamoun; we others follow the method of the tables of El-Hakem, for it is more
recent, and between the old and the new system there are discrepancies and divergences. The sages of
antiquity recognized that recent things are preferable to old ones, because of the displacement of the
stars and the change that occurs in the calculations." And on this subject, they conversed with the sultan
of things that are reported in the special works and ended by advising him to build a new observatory that
would permit verifying the calculations and making the errors and faults disappear, which, besides the
real and considerable utility one would draw from it, would procure the sultan a brilliant glory and an
imperishable renown. "Whom to charge with this?" asked El-Afdal. One of his friends and counselors, the
venerable cheikh Abou-l-Hassan Ibn Abou Osamat, took the word and said: "The cadi Ibn Abou-l-'Eich
El-Taraboulsi, the virtuous and learned engineer." Ibn Abou-l-'Eïch was his son-in-law, for he had married
his daughter; he was a personage very old and very powerful and moreover very rich, who was supported again
in this affair by the general Abou Abd Allah, who had taken the vizierate after El-Afdal and who was
designated under the name of El-Mamoun Ibn El-Bataïhi. El-Afdal found the counsel judicious and said: "Let
him be given the order to occupy himself with this affair and let him ask for what will be necessary to
him!" All this being thus arranged, the cadi began by boasting very loudly; now what El-Afdal detested
above all things was to hear people boast or to see them adorn themselves with brilliant robes. "These
instruments," said the cheikh, "are enormous and their manipulation hazardous; not everyone knows how to
use them as is fitting." And he spoke, spoke at length, not ceasing to boast and saying: "It is necessary
that the one who is charged with this work be supported generously and magnificently, so that his heart
remains calm to supervise closely the operation, that his chest be at ease and his mind free and reassured
by the justice that will have been rendered to him." El-Afdal, very discontented, cried: "By God, he boasts
too much! he exalts too much his science; I no longer wish to hear of it nor have anything to do with
him!" And the general Ibn El-Bataïhi made a sign and said: "There is here someone capable of accomplishing
this work easily, in very little time and in the best manner; it is Abou Saïd Ibn Qaraqat the physician,
who is currently charged with the magazine of arms, saddles, tools, etc." He was made

[PDF p. 398]

to come on the spot; and he set about speaking well and simply, explaining for what purpose the instruments
had been made and who had invented them. He spoke of the scholars of antiquity and of all those who, until
the latest times, had made astronomical observations, and all this clearly and calmly as if he had recited
by heart or had read in a book. El-Afdal and the assistants were marveled; and El-Afdal having asked him
what he needed, he answered: "I need very little, and I can even procure it easily since all that is
necessary to me is found in the magazines of the sultan, may God strengthen his reign! I need copper, lead,
tools; but, all that I need, I will ask for it one after another, except the money for the expenses and the
salary of the workers, with which another than I will be charged." El-Afdal, surprised, cried: "Let a
salary be allotted to him for himself." But the old man resumed: "I form part of the employees, and what is
allotted to me suffices me; I am a servant of the kingdom and have no need of another salary. If I reach my
goal, and if I lead things to a good end, that will be my recompense." It had been said to El-Afdal that
the installation of this observatory would cost much money; thus he asked: "How much do you need, in sum?"
"That," answered Abou Saïd, "will not demand more expenses than a mosque or a belvedere." And as El-Afdal
insisted, he said: "Bring me paper," and he wrote on it this: "The servant kisses the earth and says: I
have made the list of the things I need; let a sublime decree prescribe to the Dar el-Ouakalat to remit to
me 200 qantars of copper in blocks, 80 qantars of copper of Spain in rods, 40 qantars of red copper, 1,000
qantars of lead; to furnish me from the arsenal the wood to burn, the iron, the steel, and the construction
wood; finally, for the expenses, 100 dinars that will remain in the hands of a writer charged with the
accounts and of which I will ask the renewal when they are exhausted. I will choose a place favorable to
the establishment of an observatory and, during the work, the sultan will supervise the operations and
watch over the execution of his orders." El-Afdal approved all and wished in addition to accord him a robe
of honor. "That," said the general, "must be given later, when we will have seen his work." And from the
beginning until the end, Abou Saïd did not claim a single dirhem for himself; he would have been ashamed to
beg, he who was an employee of the sultan. Each of those who were [...]

[PDF p. 399]

there hoped indeed to live long, but El-Afdal was killed the following year and the situation found itself
at that moment modified.

One had therefore first chosen, to install the observatory, the mosque of the Oven on the Moqattam; but it
is found too far from all that was necessary, and, by common accord, the choice fell on the plateau of
El-Garf in the great mosque of El-Filat. For this mosque alone one had spent 6,000 dinars. One dug there a
hole in the mountain, at the place where the cisterns are found today, and one constructed there a mold for
the great circle whose diameter was 10 cubits and the circumference 30 cubits. One took long days to arrange
and install it; then one built around it ten furnaces each provided with two bellows; in each furnace one
threw 11 qantars of copper, more or less, the whole making 100 qantars and a fraction distributed in the
ten furnaces. One lit the fire in the afternoon and one blew until the second hour of the following day. In
the morning El-Afdal came and sat on a throne; and when the furnaces were ready and in full work, El-Afdal
gave the order to open the furnaces; on each of them stood a worker, and, when the order was given to open
the doors, all were opened at the same time and the copper rushed like water into the mold; but there had
remained there a little humidity, and, when the copper had penetrated it, its heat made the humid place
burst and the circle was not perfect. When it was cooled and one had uncovered it, it was found perfect in
all points, except at the place where the humidity had stayed. El-Afdal was very discontented and his chest
narrowed; he threw the workers a purse of 1,000 dinars and, filled with anger, he mounted on horseback. Ibn
Qaraqat managed to appease him by explaining that an instrument of this dimension, and such as one had never
spoken of a similar instrument, had great chances of not succeeding at the first try and that one should
esteem oneself happy if one obtained it after ten trials. "Prepare yourselves then to begin again," said
El-Afdal. It was therefore recast, and this time it was perfect. This time, El-Afdal was absent but he was
very happy at the completion of the work. The finished circle was raised on the terrace of the mosque of
El-Filat: at this work were present all the people who work copper. One made for this circle a gigantic
compass in oak wood. Then one built in the middle of the circle a bench of stone, in which one arranged a
hole to lodge the foot of the compass, which had

[PDF p. 400]

there the aspect of a mill-tree (axle). In this tree was fixed an arm, similar to the arm of a mill, and
provided with an armature of iron. The rest was in very solid oak wood. The point of the arm was destined
for multiple uses, now flattening the surface of the circle, now polishing the sides, now tracing grooves.
One employed a very long time in the cleaning of the circle and the polishing with the file. The workers,
the engineers, the scholars, everyone was there, and Ibn Qaraqat had a tent asked of the sultan to cover
the whole; and below the circle one constructed a solid vault. One would have wished to leave this circle
on the terrace of the mosque of El-Filat, but it was not possible, for one recognized that the first rays
of the rising sun were masked. One was therefore of the opinion of transporting it to the mosque of
El-Giouch, which one also calls mosque of the Observatory. El-Afdal had begun its construction, more
magnificent than that of El-Filat, but he had not finished it. As soon as he knew that one was to make of
it the observatory, he finished it. He attended the transport of the circle from the mosque of El-Filat to
the mosque of El-Giouch. One brought masts, cables, and hooks from Alexandria and the other ports; and one
gathered sailors and negroes, cavalry and infantry to lower the circle and conduct it on carts to the
mosque of El-Rased el-Giouchi. And the next day all set to work to raise it on the terrace; this operation
finished, the circle was installed, and at the two extremities of the diameter one raised two columns of
marble that were fastened by means of molten lead poured at the base and at the summit, so that the weight
of the bronze did not make them lower. At the center was raised another column of marble, at the summit of
which was the pivot of the alidade; the latter had first been cast in copper, but as one could not use it
nor make it turn, one remade it in sag wood with the points and the pivot in copper to facilitate the
revolution of the alidade. Then by means of this circle one observed the sun; one had much trouble, for at
every instant the circle inclined by a degree and some minutes because of the weight, so one made a column
of copper in addition to the column of marble, in order to check the sinking; then one tried again; but one
ascertained always discrepancies, despite the supports that propped the instrument and although the alidade
was made only of wood. And El-Afdal, despite his age and his weakening, came often. The general carried him
to the top, and often on the way the fatigue

[PDF p. 401]

constrained him to sit without being able to speak and with hands all trembling. One made several
observations in his presence. It is toward this moment that he was killed during the night of the breaking
of the fast of the year 515 [the night of 12 to 13 December 1121]. One had said to El-Afdal that Ibn
Qaraqat had exaggerated the grandeur of his circle and given too much length to its diameter; thus the
sultan had said to Ibn Qaraqat: "If you had made your circle smaller, the work would have been easier." "By
your generosity!" answered Ibn Qaraqat, "if I had been able to make it in such a way that one of its
extremities was at the pyramids and the other on the Tannour, certainly I would have made it. The greater
the instruments, the more exact the operations. What are indeed these instruments in comparison with the
celestial world?" But as one insisted on this subject, Ibn Qaraqat constructed a smaller circle that was
installed in an edifice of red brick, at the foot of the mosque of El-Giouch; the diameter of this small
circle was only 7 cubits and the circumference 21 cubits. It had just been finished when El-Afdal was
killed. One had spent in money, for all the costs and the salary of the workers, only about 160 dinars.

El-Mamoun El-Bataïhi, having become vizier, wished to finish this work and give it the name of Rectified
Observatory of El-Mamoun, just as one had given the old observatory the name of Essay of El-Mamoun. For
this, he published a decree prescribing the transport of the observatory to Bab el-Nasr, at Cairo; this
transport was effected in the same conditions as previously, and one employed the same engines as well as
sailors and troops of workers. For the lunch of these men one spent each day a quantity of dirhems. When
the circle was mounted on the carts, one made it pass along the ditch behind the mosque of El-Fatah, of the
quarter of El-Meshahed, and one conducted it thus until the mosque of El-Dakhirat, outside Cairo; one had
much trouble to bring it under the gate (Bab el-Nasr), for one feared to strike it and warp it. Once there,
masts were raised under the vault of Bab el-Nasr, under the gate itself, and a great number of laborers
were harnessed to the cables, some hoisting from below, others pulling from above, and the instrument
arrived finally at the great terrace whence one transported it to the upper terrace; there it was installed
on columns, as we

[PDF p. 402]

have explained above. By means of the great circle one made observations as one had made on the plateau of
El-Gorf; one observed with exactitude all that concerned the sun, but the sun only. One then resolved to
make a circle whose diameter would be only 5 cubits, one cast it in a hostelry of the quarter of
El-'Atoufiah at Cairo, a work truly easy for people who had succeeded with the first two circles. El-Mamoun
came frequently to the foundry and was keenly interested in the operation. Ibn Qaraqat came there twice a
day, and one met there also Abou Giafar ben Hasandaï and Abou-l-Barakât ben Abou-l-Leitz, chief of the
divan and charged with the direction of affairs. Al-Mamoun had said to him: "Go up to them each day and,
all that they ask, give it to them without asking me for orders." The aim of the vizier was to finish the
work rapidly and give the observatory the name of Rectified Observatory of El-Mamoun. If God had permitted
that El-Mamoun remain still a little, all the observatory of the planets would have been finished, but he
took him in the night of Saturday the 3rd day of Ramadan of the year 519 [3 October 1125]; and,
subsequently, one made a crime of this vizier for the construction of this observatory and the interest he
took in it, affirming that his ambition had been to give the observatory the name of El-Mamoun and not that
of the caliph El-Amr bihakam Allah. As for the crowd, it claimed that this construction had no other aim
than to converse with Saturn and to know by it the hidden things. Others accused them of magic and other
futilities.

After the death of El-Mamoun, the work was abandoned, and, as the caliph refused to pursue it, no one dared
speak to him of it; one even demolished it by his order and the materials were carried to the magazines.
All those who had been employed there, near or far, fled. Among those were the engineers who had been
charged with the service and the daily upkeep of the observatory and who were never to absent themselves:
the cheikh Abou Giafar Ibn Hasandaï; the cadi Ibn Abou-l-Yach; the orator Abou-l-Hassan Aly ben Soliman ben
Ayoub; the cheikh Abou-l-Nagga Ibn Sanad, clockmaker of Alexandria and engineer; Abou Mohammed Abd El-Kerim
El-Saqli, the engineer, and others still, mathematicians or

[PDF p. 403]

astronomers, like Ibn El-Halebi, Ibn El-Heïtsmi, Abou Naser, disciple of Sahloun, Ibn Diab, El-Qala'ï, who
all were present each day from dawn, as well as the chief of the divan Ibn Abou-l-Leitz. Ibn Hasandaï
absented himself sometimes for several days, for he was a great personage, very proud and very powerful.
Each day, El-Mamoun sent an emissary to supervise the personnel and note the absent ones, for he liked to
occupy himself with everything and employed spies and reporters who always had the eye open, so that the
smallest thing could not be done, whether among the great or among the people, at Cairo or at Masr, without
his knowing it. He had even organized in the provinces a service of espionage that informed him of all that
happened there.

For me, I have seen this place, still called today the Observatory, where is found the mosque of El-Filat;
it was still a place very peopled and covered with houses and mosques; but all that has disappeared and
there are no more inhabitants. The king El-Nacer Mohammed ben Qalaoun had saqiehs dug there to bring to the
foot of the hill of the Observatory and from there to the Citadel, the water of a canal starting from the
Nile, in the vicinity of the station of El-Atsar el-Nabouïat. But this sultan being dead, the work remained
unfinished; this moreover will be recounted to you in the chapter of this book that treats of the Citadel
of the Mountain. The site of the observatory still serves as a goal of promenade for the inhabitants of
Masr.

It is reported that El-Moezz lidin Allah Moadd, arriving from the Maghreb at Cairo, was discontented with
the site chosen for the town and said to the general Gouher: "Since you neglected to build Cairo on the
Nile, why did you not construct it on the Garf?" (that is, at the place of which we speak).

The meat, it is asserted, spoils at Cairo after a day and a night; it conserves itself two days and two
nights at the Citadel of the Mountain, but it remains intact for three days and as many nights at the
Observatory; this fact is due to the purity of the air.

And this poet drank at the same breast as God, who said:

[The verses themselves are not preserved in the source text at this point.]


=========================================================
SECOND PART
=========================================================

[PDF p. 404]

CHAPTER I
OF THE TOWNS OF THE LAND OF EGYPT

The verb madana, says Ibn Saïdat, signifies "to reside in a place"; the word medinat (town) has the sense
of "shelter raised above the soil"; it derives from the first and makes in the plural [Arabic forms].
Starting from there, Abou-l-Hassan, cited by El-Faresi, has very justly declared that [the word] is of the
[given] form. The ulema Athir el-din Abou Hiân says likewise that it is a common noun derived [as
indicated]. Some claim however that this term is of [another] form and derived from [another root], in
which they are mistaken; for the Arabs agree to hamza it in the plural and write it with the hamza and not
with the [other letter]. [Grammatical discussion of the word's derivation.]

The towns of Egypt are very numerous: some of them have disappeared without leaving traces and without even
their name having been conserved; others are better known to us and vestiges of them subsist; others
finally are still inhabited.

The most ancient town of Egypt whose name has been retained is the town of Amsous; the flood effaced the
trace of it, but there remain to us about it numerous accounts; it is there that the kings of Egypt resided
before the flood. The capital of Egypt after the flood was the town of Memphis, where resided the kings of
the Copts and the Pharaohs until its destruction by Bokhta-Nas'ar (Nebuchadnezzar); and when the Macedonian
Alexander, son of Philip, come from Greece, his empire, arrived in Egypt, he founded at Alexandria a new
town, in its turn capital of Egypt until the conquest of Amr ben El-As, who, at the head of the Muslim
army, subjugated the land of Egypt. The new conqueror founded Fostat-Masr, which remained the seat of the
government of Egypt until

[PDF p. 405]

the time when the general Gouher, come from the West with the troops of El-Mo'ezz li din Allah Abou Tamim
Mo'add, seized Egypt and raised Cairo there. This last town remained the capital of the kingdom until the
fall of the Fatimid dynasty, chased out by the sultan Salah el din Yousef ben Ayoub, who built the citadel
of the mountain; but Cairo has not ceased to be the capital until the present epoch.

In Egypt, multitudes of important towns are met that have not been capitals: El Fayoum, Dallas, Ahnas,
Behnesa, El Qeis, Talkha, Achmouneïn, Ansena (Antinoë), Qous, Siout, Faou, Akhmim, Beliana, Hou, Qena,
Denderah, Qoft, El Aqsar (Luxor), Esna, Erment, Edfou, and the frontier post of Assouan that we assimilate
to a town. These localities are found in the southern region. The Egyptians give to the Copts who inhabit
the Said the name of Maris and to the inhabitants of the Delta that of Bima.

In the northern region one meets the town of Noub of the eastern Houf, which forms part of the Delta, and
the towns of: Aïn Shams (Heliopolis), Atrib, Tanoua with the district of Zankaloun, the town of Nemy,
Basta whose site is designated today under the name of Tell-Basta, Qarbeit, El Batnoun, Menouf, Tarah,
another Menouf, Sakha, El Ausah which is the same as Demirah, Tidah, El Afrahoun, which comprises Nisha
among its dependencies, Baqîrah, Bena, Shoubrasàt, Samanoud, Noussa, Sabta, El Negoum; the town of El
Negoum has been completely invaded by the sands and the sebakh, and one no longer knows of it but the
borough of Edkou on the shore of the sea between Alexandria and Rosetta; then come the towns of Tennis,
Damietta, Farma, El Arish, Sa, Bornout, Qortassa, Akhnou, Rashid (Rosetta), Mariout, Loubiah-Maraqiah;
beyond Loubiah-Maraqiah, one enters on the territory of the Cyrenaica (Pentapolis), which is the desert.

In the region of the East (the direction of the qibla, the orient for Egypt) are the towns of Farân,
Qolzoum, Râïah, Aïlah, and Madian.

Most of these towns have been ruined, but on many of them run very widespread accounts; some date only from
Islam; God willing, I will give of all these accounts enough to satisfy the reader.

The land of Egypt forms today two regions, southern and northern, whose ensemble is divided into fifteen
provinces. The region of the South is the largest and comprises nine provinces: (1) that of Qous, the most

[PDF p. 406]

considerable, extending to Assouan and to the west of Qamoulah; Assouan is situated at the extreme limit of
the Empire on the side of the South; (2) the province of Akhmim; (3) that of Siout; (4) that of Manfalout;
(5) that of Achmouneïn where is found El Tahaouyah; (6) the province of Behnesa; (7) that of the Fayoum;
(8) that of Atfîh, and (9) that of Gizeh. The northern region encloses six provinces: (1) the province of
Beheïrah which runs along the sea toward Alexandria and Barqah; (2) the province of Gharbieh (western)
formed by a single island occupying all the space comprised between the two arms of the Nile named branch
of Damietta and branch of Rosetta; (3) the province of Menoufieh of which form part the wells designated
under the name of "island of the Beni Naser"; (4) the province of Qalioub; (5) that of Sharqieh (eastern);
(6) that of Ashmoum Tanah comprising the Daqhalieh and the Mourtahieh; it is in this province that are
found the frontier posts of Bourlos and of Rosetta and Mansourah. In this region also are Alexandria and
Damietta, towns that form part of no province.

Abou-l-Hassan El Masa'oudi, in his book "Chronicle of the Time," reports that the Koukas, a tribe belonging
to the people of Aïlah, seized the country of Egypt and divided the Said into eighty districts distributed
in four provinces; in these districts were comprised thirty Egyptian towns of the interior where one met
all sorts of marvelous objects; it is there that were found districts like those of Akhmim, of Qouft, of
Qous, and of the Fayoum.

It is claimed that Masr, son of Beïsar, divided the country among his children, giving to his son Ashmoun
the territory that extends from the town that bears his name (Ashmouneïn) to Ras el Bahr on the side of
Damietta; to his son Ansena the region comprised between Ansena and the Cataracts; to his son Sa the
country that goes from Sa in the Delta to Alexandria; to his son Menouf the interior of Lower Egypt,
Memphis, and the surrounding territory; to his son Qoft the west of the Said to the Cataracts; to his son
Atrib the east of the kingdom to the desert of Farân, and finally to his three daughters Farma, Siriâm, and
Badourah portions of Egyptian lands enclaved in the shares of their brothers.

[PDF p. 407]

CHAPTER II
OF THE TOWN OF AMSOUS, OF ITS MARVELS AND OF ITS KINGS

Master Ibrahim ben Ouacif Shah the writer, in his book entitled Accounts and Marvels of Egypt, reports that
the town of Masr bore in ancient times the name of Amsous, and that the first king of Egypt was Naqrâoush
the powerful, son of Misraïm. Naqrâoush signifies "king of his people." This Naqrâoush, son of Misraïm the
Ancient, son of Mourqaïïl, son of Douaïïl, son of 'Ariab, son of Adam, set out with seventy and some valiant
cavaliers of the Benou-'Ariab seeking a country where to flee the sons of their father, for, in that time,
they were jealous of and oppressed one another, and the Benou 'Ariab were molested by the Benou Qabîl. The
Benou 'Ariab stopped their course only at the Nile and, marveled at the beauty and the extent of the
country, they settled there and constructed admirable edifices there. Naqrâoush raised the town of Masr to
which he gave the name of his father Misraïm, then he abandoned it and had a second built for himself that
he called Amsous. This prince, according to what Ibn Ouacif Shah says, knew a part of the sciences that
Douaïïl had learned from Adam; he constructed towers, raised stelae, edified palaces, had the metals
extracted from the earth, raised talismans, dug canals, and founded towns; all the elevated sciences the
Egyptians possessed came to them from Naqrâoush and his companions. These sciences were represented on
stone, and it is they that the priest Qlimoun, who accompanied Noah in the ark, explained later.

Naqrâoush, having founded Amsous, peopled it with marvels among which must be cited: a bird that each day
whistled twice at sunrise and twice at sunset; by this whistling one was informed of the events that were
accomplishing themselves, so much so that one could take the dispositions these events necessitated; a
statue of black stone placed at the center of the town and to which faced another similar statue; if some
thief penetrated into the town, he could not do otherwise than pass between these two statues, and as soon
as he found himself there, they joined together upon him and one arrested him; another statue of bronze
placed on an elevated tower and above which one saw ceaselessly clouds heaped up: whoever addressed himself
to

[PDF p. 408]

this statue and asked it for rain obtained from it what he desired. He had also raised on the frontiers of
the country statues of copper, hollow and filled with sulfur, over which watched spirits of fire; as soon
as someone approached them, these statues launched from the mouth flames that burned him. On the mountain
of Botros, he raised a tower from which escaped a watercourse that watered all the cultivations of the
vicinity. These monuments remained standing until the moment when the flood overturned them. It was
Naqrâoush, it is said, who improved the course of the Nile; before, the river spread between the two
mountains; to remedy it, this prince sent into Nubia a troop charged with diking it and deriving from it a
great canal on which were built towns and traced plantations. Naqrâoush wished next to know the source of
the Nile, and having set out, he reached the country situated beyond the Equator; there, he found himself
on the shore of the shadowy sea of Pitch and saw the Nile flowing on the surface of this sea, similar to a
network of threads, and penetrating finally under the mountain of Qomr to come out of it and throw itself
into lakes. It is by him also that were raised the statues that are found in this region. Returned to
Amsous, he divided the country among his children, giving to his eldest son Naqâoush the western region and
to his son Shourab the eastern region. Finally he built for his youngest son Misraïm the town of Borsân
where he resided. He reigned 180 years over Egypt, and at his death his body was embalmed with aromatic
drugs, then enclosed in a coffin of gold; one constructed for him a naos plated with gold where the body
was deposited with an innumerable quantity of treasures, essences, vases of gold. On the naos was engraved
the date of his death, and talismans were raised to keep away from it the destructive insects.

After him reigned his son Naqâoush who was, like his father, versed in the science of magic and talismans;
he is the first to have raised a temple in Egypt: he placed there the image of the seven planets and on
each of their chapels he wrote their good or their bad influence; he clothed each statue with splendid
garments and assigned to it servants and slaves. Then he set out from Amsous, directing himself toward the
West, reached the Enveloping Ocean and raised on its banks columns surmounted by statues whose eyes
sparkled in the night; from there he returned toward the country of the Blacks in the direction of the
Nile; along the river, he had built a wall provided with doors through which the water of the river flowed
off. Beyond the oases, in the desert of the West, [...]

[PDF p. 409]

he built three towns on high columns of colored and transparent stones; in each of these towns he
established a great number of houses of sciences, and in one of them he raised the statue of the Sun,
represented under the features of a man with the body of a bird, the whole of gold, except the eyes which
were of yellow precious stones; the statue was placed on a pedestal of magnet (lodestone) and held in its
claw a volume of science. In another of these towns, he erected a statue with a human head and the body of
a bird near which was the image of a seated woman; the latter was of solidified mercury, she was coiffed
with two tresses and held in her hand a mirror; on her head was the emblem of a planet, and she raised the
mirror to the height of her face. In the third town, one put a basin into which flowed seven waters of
different colors and that did not mix at all. In one of these towns was the image of an old man made of
turquoises, having before him young children seated, all made of rubies; in one town rose the image of
Hermes -- that is, of Mercury -- bent over a table placed before him, made of sal ammoniac and mounted on
feet of red sulfur; in the middle of the table was placed a page written in (incrusted) precious stones.
There was found also the image of an eagle in green emerald, with eyes of yellow topaz, holding in its
talon a blue serpent in silver whose tail wound around the eagle's legs and whose head reared up as if to
hiss against it. There was found still a representation of Mars mounted on a horse and holding in its hand
a naked sword, the whole in green iron. One saw there a column of red precious stones surmounted by a
cupola of gold in which rose the statue of Jupiter; one saw there still a cupola of zinc placed on four
columns of blue glass; at the summit rose the statue of the Sun and the Moon represented under the features
of a man and a woman in the act of conversing. There was found also another cupola of red sulfur enclosing
the image of Venus under the features of a woman occupied in braiding her hair; at her feet a man, in green
emerald, held in his hand a book enclosing some one of their sciences and that he seemed to read to his
companion. In the rest of the magazines, he deposited treasures in silver, in precious stones and in
jewels, precious elixirs, specimens of remedies and mortal poisons, the whole in innumerable quantity. At
the door of each of these towns was applied a talisman to defend access to it. Then he had executed long
underground corridors by which these towns communicated with one another, each

[PDF p. 410]

underground passage being three miles long. He constructed still in Egypt another town named Halgama, in
which he traced a garden whose walls were ornamented with precious stones incrusted in gold; he planted
there all sorts of trees under which he made canals run; there were planted likewise trees producing all
species of edible fruits; then he built a cupola of red marble surmounted by a statue that turned at the
same time as the sun, and he set to its guard demons charged with killing whoever went out of his house
during the night. One raised there also stelae on which were engraved all the sciences, the recipe of the
drugs, their utility and their harmfulness. For this town also, he made an underground passage that joined
the underground passages of the three other towns; between the latter and the other underground passage
there were twenty miles. These towns lasted until the flood. And when Naqâoush died, after having reigned
109 years over Egypt, one buried his body and deposited it in a naos provided with talismans.

After him reigned his brother Misrâm, son of Naqrâoush the powerful, son of Misraïm; it is from him, it is
said, that Egypt took its name of Masr. This prince was a sage, and he raised to the Sun a temple of marble
plated with red gold in the middle of which was a horse of blue stone bearing the statue of the Sun in red
gold; on the head of the statue was a vase of glass enclosing a special stone endowed with a brightness
more vivid than that of a lamp. He tamed the lions and used them as mounts. He went as far as the Enveloping
Ocean and raised in the middle of this sea a white citadel on which rose the statue of the Sun, and on this
monument he engraved his name and his portrait. He made still another statue of copper on which he engraved
these words: "I am Misrâm the powerful, the revealer of mysteries, the victorious, the strong; I have
executed true talismans; I have raised statues endowed with speech, I have raised formidable monuments on
the shore of the undulating sea. Let posterity learn that no one has the vigor of my arm!" Then he returned
to Amsous and withdrew himself from the eyes of the world during thirty years, having established to
replace him a man of the lineage of 'Ariab, son of Adam, named 'Eïqâm, priest and magician at once. Time
continuing to pass, the people of Egypt had the desire to see their king; 'Eïqâm, having taken the
instructions of Misrâm, gathered the people, and the king appeared on a throne enriched with all sorts of
ornaments and in a frightful array that filled the hearts with terror; his subjects fell prostrate before
him and adored him; Misrâm had

[PDF p. 411]

a feast prepared for them where all ate and drank, after which Misrâm ordered them to regain their
dwellings, and since then he was no longer seen.

After him reigned 'Eïqâm, the one who had held his place. On his subject, there are among the Egyptians
legends that reason refuses to believe. It is in his time, it is reported, that appeared Idris, thanks to
whom 'Eïqâm could foresee the flood and have constructed, beyond the Equator, on the plateau of the mountain
of Qomr, a palace of copper where were raised eighty-five statues of copper by whose mouths flowed the
water of the Nile, falling first into a lake to direct itself next toward Egypt. 'Eïqâm himself left Amsous
to go to this palace and see with his own eyes the ordinance of the constructions and the ornaments of the
walls, such as the engravings representing the celestial images, etc. The interior of the palace was lit by
lamps, and tables were set there on which were served all sorts of delicious dishes in magnificent vases,
and these dishes, however much the soldiers of his escort ate of them, diminished in nothing, and one could
know neither who had prepared them nor who had served them. In the middle of the palace was a basin filled
with water solidified at the surface, but mobile beneath, and whose movement one saw through the solid part.
Charmed by what he had seen, 'Eïqâm returned to Amsous, chose to replace him his son 'Ariâq, confided to him
the power and gave him his instructions; for himself, he returned to this palace and remained there until
his death. It is to this 'Eïqâm that are attributed the Coptic books that enclose the history of this people
and of all that is to happen until the end of time.

After him, the power passed to 'Ariâq who is also called 'Ariâq ben 'Eïqâm surnamed El Athîm (the guilty).
He fabricated also diverse marvelous objects, among others: (1) a yellow tree whose iron branches were
armed with claws; if some malefactor approached this tree, he was seized by these claws and could deliver
himself from them only by confessing his crime and restoring his theft to the injured person; (2) a statue
in black pumice stone to which he gave the name of 'Abd Zahal (servant of Saturn). It is before it that one
was cited in justice, and the one who was in the wrong remained fixed to his place and could not move away
except by confessing his crime himself, even were he to remain there a year. Every person who lacked some
object had only to rise during the night and look at the planets, praying and pronouncing the name of
'Ariâq; in the morning on his waking, the desired object was at his door. He had fabricated also an

[PDF p. 412]

iron tree whose branches had been coated with a prepared drug that attracted all sorts of animals, lions
and wild beasts, so much so that the hunters could easily seize them. If he was irritated against the
inhabitants of a province, he loosed upon them the wild beasts and the lions, and sometimes he changed
their (beneficent) rains into furious downpours. It is claimed that Harout and Marout appeared under his
reign. He had constructed a splendid garden and had gathered there the most beautiful women, whom he had
had carried off; one of them, using cunning, managed to poison him.

At his death, he was replaced by Lugim ben Naqâoush, who is claimed to be a descendant of Naqrâoush the
powerful and who is called Lugim the Young; it is he who took back the empire from 'Ariâq, son of 'Eïqâm
the priest, and who returned it to the Benou Naqrâoush from whose hands it had gone out, and this without
war or combat. He was learned in magic and the art of talismans and executed several marvelous things. In
his time, the vultures and the crows had multiplied and devastated the harvests; he raised four towers at
the four corners of the town of Amsous and placed on each of them the image of a crow holding in its beak
a serpent that wound around it; the harmful birds, terrified by these images, disappeared at once never to
return as long as the towers remained standing, but they were overturned by the flood. The conduct of
Lugim was admirable; he showed himself full of equity for his subjects, just and generous toward the
priests. At his death, he was buried in a naos and his treasures with him, and one attached to this naos a
preservative talisman.

After him reigned his son Khaslim, a virtuous prince and instructed in magic, who executed also marvelous
objects. It is to him that is due the first meqias (Nilometer) destined to measure the flood of the Nile;
having gathered the princes of science and the engineers, these raised on the bank of the river a
construction of marble in the middle of which was placed a small basin of copper containing a determined
quantity of water; above this basin were placed two eagles of copper, one male, the other female; on the
first day of the month in which the flood began, one opened the house, the priests gathered there in the
presence of the king and mumbled their prayers there until one of the eagles whistled. If the male eagle
whistled, it presaged an excellent Nile; if on the contrary it was the female, the Nile would be
insufficient. According to this, one could take one's precautions against the rise of the price of grains
and make one's provisions in advance. It is this prince also who established in Nubia the bridge over

[PDF p. 413]

the Nile. At his death, one enclosed him with his treasures in a naos to which was attached a talisman.

After him reigned his son Housâl or Yousâl, a word that signifies "servant of Venus"; some name him Soumâl
ben Lugim El Naqrâoushi, for he was of the family of Naqrâoush the powerful. It is in his time, it is said,
that Noah was born. He was a virtuous prince, very versed in magic and the art of talismans, and who made,
he too, marvelous things, among others a town in the middle of which he raised to the Sun a statue that
turned at the same time as this star, setting in the west and rising, in the morning, in the east. He dug
also a corridor under the Nile, followed an underground path, and arrived unexpectedly at Babel to visit
there the monuments raised by the king. Noah lived in his time. He had twenty sons to each of whom he
assigned a region; he was the great chief of magic and remained on the throne 117 years, after which he
occupied himself no more than with the temples, leaving to each of his sons the care of regulating the
affairs of the territory that had been attributed to him by his father. And for seven years it was thus.

Then their suffrages gathered on one of them whom they elected king; he was called Todareshan or
Todaresar. As soon as the latter was king, he exiled all his brothers into the towns of the interior, to
the west of Egypt, and keeping with him only a woman, his cousin, who was a magician, he built himself a
pavilion of wood where were engraved the images of the planets; he stretched the richest carpets and,
having had it transported onto the water, he promenaded there reclining (on cushions). Now, one day when he
was promenading thus, a violent wind began to blow that raised the waves, overturned and broke the
pavilion; the king was drowned as well as all those who were with him in the floating palace.

After him reigned his brother Nimroud the powerful, who is also called Shimroud ben Housâl. This prince had
an admirable conduct, he was just toward his subjects and full of equity; he gathered his brothers and
divided with them the treasures of their dead brother; thanks to him, the people were happy. He had the
wife of his brother, the magician, sought, but the latter took flight with her son and took refuge in a
town of Upper Egypt where she put herself out of reach of the pursuits of her brother-in-law, thanks to
her magic. At the end of a certain time, the magicians she had gathered around her son Toumidoûn suggested
to him the idea of seizing the power. Nimroud and his brothers marched against him; a terrible combat was
engaged in which Toumidoûn was victorious and where perished Nimroud.

[PDF p. 414]

After him reigned Toumidoûn ben Todareshan, who established his capital in Amsous. He was a skillful and
wise prince whom the magic of his mother rendered formidable. The latter executed for him marvelous works:
a cupola of glass, made in the image of the celestial sphere, and that turned at the same time as the
firmament; in this cupola were represented the images of the planets: by it one knew the secrets of nature
and all the sciences of the world. Toumidoûn had reigned for 60 years when his mother, the magician, died.
One coated her body with aromatics destined to preserve it from corruption and from insects, then one
buried her under the statue of the Moon. It is recounted that after her death one heard, coming from her
tomb, the voice of a spirit that predicted marvelous things and answered the questions that were posed to
it. When Toumidoûn died, after a reign of 100 years, one made for him a statue of glass that opened in two
parts and into which one introduced his body impregnated with all the aromatics preservative of
putrefaction; then the statue was closed again and soldered, and finally deposited in the temple of the
idols; near him were buried his treasures, and one instituted for him an annual feast.

After him reigned his son Shariâq, also called Sariâq ben Toumidoûn ben Todaresân ben Housâl; like his
father, he was very versed in magic, sorcery, and the art of talismans, and he made marvelous works. Above
the gate of the town of Amsous, he placed the image of a duck of copper perched on a column; if a stranger,
coming from any country whatever, entered the town, this duck beat its wings and uttered a cry; at once one
seized the stranger and one clarified his affair, in order to know the reason for his arrival. He dug a
canal that, starting from the Nile, directed itself toward the towns of the West, and, along this canal, he
built monuments, towns, and places of pleasure. A king of the lineage of Fouracha ben Adam or, according to
others, of the lineage of Souaniti ben Adam, arose in his time on the side of Iraq, subjugated the
provinces of Syria, and marched against Egypt, in order to seize its king. He had been told: "You will be
able to do nothing against this country because of the magical power of its inhabitants," but he would
believe nothing of it and, accompanied by an escort, he came himself to make himself account of the
situation of the Egyptians; from his appearance at the frontier, he was taken, with all those who
accompanied him, by the people charged with supervising this region, who sent a report and awaited the
instructions

[PDF p. 415]

of the king regarding the prisoners. Now, the king had had a dream in which he saw himself on an elevated
tower where an enormous bird precipitated itself upon him uttering cries; in wishing to avoid it, he had
nearly fallen from the tower, but the bird had passed beyond the king who in this way had been saved. On
his waking, frightened by his dream, he recounted it to the chief of the magicians, who said to him: "A
king will attack you, but he will be able to do nothing against you." And having consulted the stars of the
king, he saw that the prince who was to attack him had already entered Egypt; at this precise moment
presented itself the messenger bringing the report on the prisoners of the frontier. The king gave the
order to bring them to him, but to have them first examine all the marvels of the country. Solidly bound,
they were promenaded among the marvels of the land of Egypt, and one showed them all the talismans that
were there. They arrived first at Alexandria, then at Assouan, and finally at the garden constructed by
Misrâm and where the king Shariâq went. At the moment when the cortege presented itself, the magicians made
marvelous statues appear. The prisoners entered into the presence of the king surrounded by the priests and
before whom burned a fire that whoever wished to approach the king had to cross. This fire spared the
innocent, but seized any man who wished to do some harm to the king or who felt for him the slightest
aversion. The whole troop, man after man, passed through the fire without it doing them any harm; finally
came the turn of the king of Iraq, but at the moment when he approached the fire, the heat seized him and
he sought to take flight. One set about pursuing him and, having reached him, one brought him back to
Shariâq, who interrogated him at length and ended by knowing all that concerned him. The order was given to
hang him, and he was hanged on the citadel where he had been taken, and at the moment of his torture, one
proclaimed that such would be the chastisement of whoever coveted what would be out of his reach. As for
the other prisoners, they were pardoned; they left Egypt, recounting everywhere the marvels they had seen
there, and these accounts took from the kings of the earth all desire to conquer Egypt. Shariâq died after
a reign of 130 years. One buried him in a naos at the same time as his riches, and one executed talismans
to protect him against whoever would attempt to destroy his body.

After him reigned his son Shahlouq, very versed in magic and the art of talismans. He distributed the water
of the Nile in well-measured portions that he distributed exactly in all directions; he put in order the
affairs of the Empire and erected a temple to the Fire, for he was the first who adored this element. In

[PDF p. 416]

Amsous he executed marvelous monuments. He placed on the highest of the mountains a tree that divided the
winds and that repelled whoever wished to harm Egypt or diminish it, whether they were genies, men,
quadrupeds, or birds; he constructed also in the town a cupola with a heptagonal base and that had seven
doors, one at each face. In the middle of the cupola was found a second of yellow copper, at the summit of
which was the image of the seven planets, and below another cupola placed on seven pillars. Above the first
door of the cupola, a lion and a lioness of yellow copper, both crouched, to which one immolated a small
lion-cub, burning, in the way of perfumes, the hairs of this animal; on the second door a bull and a cow,
to which one sacrificed a calf whose hairs were burned; on the third door a boar and a sow, to which one
immolated a small piglet whose bristles were burned; on the fourth door a ram and a ewe, to which one
sacrificed a lamb whose fleece was burned; on the fifth door a male fox and a female fox to which one
sacrificed a fox-cub whose hairs were burned; on the sixth door a vulture and its female, to which one
sacrificed a young vulture whose feathers were burned; on the seventh door an eagle and its female, to
which one sacrificed an eaglet whose feathers were burned likewise; and one anointed each couple of beasts
with the blood of the animal one sacrificed to it; one burned the victims entirely and one buried the ashes
of them under the threshold of the doors of the cupola; he assigned to this cupola servants charged with
maintaining lamps day and night. He divided the people of Egypt into seven castes, to each of which was
attributed one of the doors of the cupola. If some plaintiff approached one of these images and the wrongs
were on his side, he found himself stuck to this image and could detach himself from it only by confessing
the truth; the man found himself thus fixed to the male animal and the woman to the female animal, and in
this way one recognized the oppressor and the oppressed. This cupola remained standing in Amsous until the
flood destroyed it. Shariâq, it is said, saw in a dream his father who ordered him to go to one of the
mountains of Egypt that he designated to him; on this mountain he would find an opening of such and such a
fashion; above the door he would see a viper with two heads that showed its teeth to whoever approached it.
"Take with you," added the apparition, "two small birds, one male, the other female; offer them to this
viper that it may swallow them; the viper will seize them by the head and carry them off into an underground
passage. As soon as it has disappeared, enter there in your turn.

[PDF p. 417]

There you will find an admirable woman made of hot and dry light (?); she will touch you and her heat will
make itself felt to you, do not approach her, you would be burned, but hold yourself seated facing her and
salute her; she will speak to you. It is up to you to understand well what she will tell you and to execute
it, you will derive from it much honor; she will indicate to you the treasure of your ancestor Misrâm of
which she is there the guardian." On his waking, Shariâq did what his father had prescribed to him, and when
he was seated near the woman and had saluted her, the latter said to him: "Do you know me?" "No," he
answered. "I am," she resumed, "the image of the Fire, adored by the past peoples. I wish that you make my
name live again and that you raise to me anew a temple in which you will maintain for me a perpetual fire in
a brazier, and that you institute in my honor an annual feast at which you will attend with your people. In
exchange, you will find near me a help that will render you illustrious more than you are illustrious and
powerful more than you are powerful. I will keep away from you whoever will wish to harm you, and I will
show you the treasures of your ancestor Misrâm." Shariâq having promised to execute what she asked, the lady
led him to the treasures buried under the suspended towns and taught him the manner of making himself master
of them and of guarding himself from the spirits set to their guard, giving him to this effect all the
necessary instructions. "How," asked Shariâq, "will I be able to see you again?" "Do not return any more,"
she said, "for the viper would no longer spare you, but perfume your house in such and such a manner, and I
will come to you." Thereupon, she left Shariâq all joyous; he set out and accomplished all she had ordered:
he raised a temple to the Fire, removed the treasures of Misrâm, and, at his death, one buried him in a naos
and with him all his riches and all his treasures, and a preservative talisman was placed on his tomb.

After him reigned his son Sourid, a wise and virtuous prince; it is he who, the first, collected taxes in
Egypt, had distributed, from his treasury, money to the sick and the incurable, and instituted the morning
genuflexion; he executed marvelous things: a mirror made of mixed substances, in which one saw the
different climates and by which one knew the events accomplished, and one could in consequence foresee the
abundance or the dearth; one placed this mirror, which was of copper, in the middle of the town of Amsous.
He raised also in Amsous the image of a woman seated, holding in her lap a child that she suckled; this
woman was such that if an Egyptian woman, suffering from some ill in a part of her body, came to rub the
sick part of her body against the corresponding part of the body of the statue, the ill at once disappeared;

[PDF p. 418]

if it was a question of an exhaustion of the milk, the woman had only to rub her breasts against the breasts
of the statue, and the milk returned; if it was a question of a suppression of the menses, the woman had to
rub her natural parts against those of the statue, and the menses returned; if on the contrary the blood
came in too great abundance, the woman rubbed the lower part of her pubis against the corresponding part of
the statue. In the case of a laborious childbirth, one rubbed the head of the child placed in the lap of the
statue, and the delivery accomplished itself. Did a woman wish to be loved by her husband, she rubbed her
face against that of the statue saying: "Do this or that." But if some sinful woman placed her hands on the
statue, she was seized by a trembling that calmed itself only when the criminal woman manifested her
repentance. This statue remained standing until the moment when the flood overturned it; according to the
books of the Copts, it was found again after the flood and many people adored it. Sourid raised also another
statue composed of a great number of mixed substances, and if someone suffered in some part of his body, he
had only to wash the corresponding part of the statue and to drink the water that had served for the
washing, the ill ceased at once. It is this Sourid who raised in Egypt the two great pyramids attributed to
Sheddad ben 'Ad; but the Copts refuse to admit that the Adites ever entered their country, from which their
magic would have repelled them. When Sourid died, one buried him in the pyramid with his treasures. He
lived, it is claimed, 300 years before the flood and reigned 190 years.

After him reigned his son Hargib, instructed and versed like his father in magic and the art of talismans;
thus he executed marvelous objects; he had quantities of metals extracted, brought to light the art of
chemistry, and constructed the pyramids of Dahchour, where he transported considerable riches -- precious
stones, drugs, poisons -- and confided the guard of them to spirits. A man having wounded another, he had
his fingers cut off; another having stolen money, he made of the thief the slave of the robbed. At his
death, he was buried in the pyramid, and with him his riches and his treasures.

After him reigned his son Minaous, who is also called Minqaous; he was, like his father, very learned, but
violent, vicious, sanguinary, tearing the women from their husbands, which his intimates did likewise as a
thing [...]

[PDF p. 419]

licit, following his example. He executed marvelous things and discovered treasures. He built palaces of
gold and silver that canals watered; the sand there was replaced by precious stones. He chose, to govern
his subjects, a violent man named Qornâs and set out to make war against the peoples of the West, of whom
he massacred a great number, and at his death he was buried in one of his palaces and his treasures with
him. On his tomb one put a talisman to protect him and defend him against whoever would approach.

After him reigned his son Afrous, versed like his father in knowledge and science. From his accession, he
made show of justice and equity and returned to their husbands the women his father had carried off. He
built a cupola 50 cubits long and 100 wide, and placed on its flanks birds of copper that whistled in
different fashions during an hour without stopping. In the middle of the town of Amsous, he raised a tower
at the summit of which was a human head of copper that uttered a cry each time one of the hours of the day
or the night had elapsed, and whoever heard this cry knew that an hour had just elapsed. He raised another
tower surmounted by a cupola of gilded copper and coated with unguents; and each night, as soon as the sun
was set, a light radiated from the cupola, illuminating the town of Amsous all night, so much so that one
would have believed oneself in full day; and neither the wind nor the rain could extinguish this light,
which disappeared at the moment when the day rose. He sent as a present to a king of Babel a flask of
emerald whose diameter was five spans; this flask was found again, it is said, after the flood. He had
raised also in the mountain of the East a colossal statue standing on a pedestal; this statue was painted
and the yellow parts were reproduced with gold; its face was constantly directed toward the sun and turned
at the same time as it until the moment of its setting; during the night the statue continued its evolution
and at dawn found itself facing the East, the face turned toward the rising sun. He constructed in the
desert of the West numerous towns that he provided with magnificent treasures. He lay with three hundred
women without having a child, for God had rendered the matrices sterile, having decided to annihilate the
world by the flood and to make destruction fall on men and animals. At his death, he was placed in a naos,
in the mountain of the East, and, with him, his riches and a talisman to protect him.

After him reigned Armalinous, who executed marvelous works, built

[PDF p. 420]

towns and palaces and multiplied talismans. He had a cousin named Far'an who was audacious. He removed him
by putting him at the head of an army with which he set out, subjugating the kings, massacring numerous
peoples, and pillaging their riches; on his return, one of the wives of the king became enamored of him and
left him no rest until he united himself with her; they bound themselves therefore and remained thus a long
time, then they feared that the king might discover them, and the woman prepared for Armalinous a poisoned
beverage of which he died.

After him reigned his cousin Far'ân ben Meshour; no one dared hold his head up to him because of his
violence and his skill, and he had reigned a little time when the priest Qlimoun had a dream in which white
birds seemed to descend from the sky and say: "Whoever wishes salvation, let him go to the master of the
ark." One already knew, among the Egyptians, the future arrival of the flood since the time of Sourid, and
it is for this reason that one had built the pyramids and that the people had made themselves underground
habitations plated with glass where the winds had been carefully imprisoned. Far'ân had made a certain
number of them for himself and his own. Qlimoun did not hesitate, and gathering his relatives, his children,
and his disciples, he went to Noah and embraced his faith. He remained with him and mounted with him into
the ark. The flood therefore arrived under the reign of Far'ân; Egypt was entirely submerged, its
constructions destroyed and its sciences annihilated. The water stayed on the soil for six months and rose
to the half of the great pyramids, and God willing, we will give some account of this event in the chapter
of this book that treats of the calamities of Egypt. It is said that Far'ân was arrogant and cruel, that he
seized the riches and carried off the women, and that he wrote to El Darshil ben Lahouïl of Babel, advising
him to kill Noah, for he despised the priests and the temples. In his time, the land of Egypt altered, the
cultivations were reduced to almost nothing, the two regions annihilated, for both, espousing his errors
and his crimes, associated themselves with his diversions and his games; the people followed the same path
as he and the vice propagated from one to the other. When the flood arrived and the rain began to fall,
Far'ân, drunk, rose to flee to the pyramid; but the earth opened up before him at the moment when he reached
the door: his feet failed him and he fell without strength and crying, and all those who had taken refuge
in the underground passages died of consumption. And God is the most learned.

[PDF p. 421]

CHAPTER III
OF THE TOWN OF MEMPHIS AND OF ITS KINGS

This town was situated to the west of the Nile, twelve miles from Fostat Masr; it was the first town built
in Egypt after the flood, and it became the capital of the kingdom after the town of Amsous of which we have
just spoken. Its role of capital lasted until its destruction by Bokhta-Nasar (Nebuchadnezzar). God has
spoken of it in his sublime book: "And he entered the town without the knowledge of its inhabitants" (Koran,
XXVIII, 14). The imam Abou Ga'far Mohammed ben Garir El Tabari, in his book entitled Collection of
Clarifications serving as commentary to the Koran, reports this remark of El Saddi: Moses, having become
grown, used mounts similar to those of Pharaoh and wore garments like those of the king; he was even called
"son of Pharaoh." Now, one day Pharaoh mounted on his chariot, while Moses was not near him, and, when the
latter arrived, he was informed that Pharaoh had departed. Moses mounted in a chariot and ran on the traces
of the king whom he rejoined in a place called Menf where he entered toward the hour of noon, the hour when
the markets were closed and the streets deserted. It is of this town that God speaks when he says: "And he
entered the town without the knowledge of its inhabitants." Ibn Abd el Hakem reports, on the authority of
Abd Allah ben Lahiah, that the one who first inhabited Egypt, after the destruction by the waters inflicted
by God on the people (contemporary) of Noah, was Beïsar, son of Cham, son of Noah. Beïsar established
himself at Memphis, the first town built after the flood, with his descendants; together thirty persons,
of whom his four sons, already adults and married. These four sons were Masr, Fareq, Mâg, and Yâg, sons of
Beïsar: Masr was the eldest. To this circumstance, the new town owed its name of Mafah, a word that, in the
language of the Copts, signifies "thirty." Before, they lived at the foot of the Moqattam, where they had
dug themselves numerous habitations. Ibn Khordadabah, in his book of the Routes and the Empires, says:
"Memphis is the town where Pharaoh resided and that this prince had provided with seventy gates of iron and
surrounded with walls of iron and yellow copper; there flowed rivers that took their source under the
throne of the king, and these rivers were four in number." It is recounted that the town of Memphis was
provided with bridges and dikes

[PDF p. 422]

executed with an art and a precision such that the water flowed under the houses of the town and under the
courts, and that one could retain it or distribute it at will. It is to this that God alludes in this
passage where there is question of Pharaoh: "Is it not to me that belongs the kingdom of Egypt, and do not
these canals flow by my will?" (Koran, XLIII, 50). There were at Memphis numerous statues that remained
standing until the moment when they were overturned with the other statues that fell at the hour when the
Prophet pointed the finger toward the idols, the day of the conquest of Mecca; that day the Prophet, a rod
in hand, made the circuit of the town crying: "The truth has come, the falsehood has vanished, the
falsehood is destined to disappear" (Koran, XVII, 83). And all the statues whose face his rod menaced fell
on the nape, and all those whose nape he menaced fell on the face, so much so that there remained no statue
that did not fall. And at this same hour were overturned all the idols of the earth, from the Orient to the
Occident, and their adepts remained stupefied, ignorant of the cause of their fall. And since that time, the
idols of Memphis remained overturned. It is in this town that were seen the two great statues neighboring
the Green House that enclosed the statue of El 'Aziz, all of gold with the eyes made of two incomparable
rubies; later, after the year 600 [10 September 1203 to 28 August 1204], the statues and the Green House
were put to pieces.

Memphis, it is said, had thirty miles of length and twenty miles of width. In the time of Misraïm, a
descendant of Japhet, son of Noah, had made an apparatus to raise the water and transport it to the crest
of the wall of the town; this apparatus was composed of hollow rungs, and, each time the water reached one
of these rungs, the following filled itself; in this fashion, the water reached the summit of the wall
whence, by a skillful distribution, it penetrated into each house of the town and came out of it to be
conducted outside the city.

There was at Memphis a house (naos) of green granite of a single piece and very hard, on which the iron
could not bite; this naos enclosed a statue and characters were engraved on it. On the lintel of the door
were represented serpents with swollen necks. Thousands of people gathered could not have managed to shake
it, so enormous and heavy was it. The Sabeans claim that it was a temple of the Moon and that it formed part
of the seven temples

[PDF p. 423]

raised in Memphis to the seven planets. This Green House was demolished by the emir Seïf el Din Sheïkhoun El
'Amri after the year 750 [22 March 1349 to 10 March 1350]. There remain some debris of it in the convent and
in the mosque that this emir had constructed in the street of Salibah, outside Cairo. Abou 'Abd Allah
Mohammed ben 'Abd el Rahman el Qeïsi, in his book Present to the Intelligences, says: "I saw in the palace
of the Pharaoh of Moses a great house made of a single stone, green like the myrtle and in which were
represented the firmaments and the stars: we have never seen a more beautiful marvel."

Abou-l Solt Ommyah ben 'Abd el 'Aziz el Andalousi says: "In ancient times, the capital of Egypt was the
town of Memphis, to the west of the Nile and twelve miles from Fostat; but when Alexander had founded the
town of Alexandria, the people flocked there and peopled it, and it became the abode of science and the
residence of the government until its conquest by the Muslims, in the time of 'Omar ben El Khattab, when
'Amr ben el 'As founded the town known under the name of Fostat. The Egyptians and others still, Arabs and
non-Arabs, came to inhabit it in crowds, and it remained the chief-place of the provinces and the districts
of Egypt until our epoch."

Master Ibrahim ben Ouacif Shah, the writer, after having reported the history of the town of Amsous and the
destruction of its edifices by the flood of Noah, adds: "The waters having withdrawn, the first who reigned
in Egypt after the flood was Beïsar, son of Cham, son of Noah: he was accompanied by thirty persons, of the
most courageous of his family and his children; all gathered and edified the town of Memphis where they
installed themselves. With them was the priest Qlimoun, of whom there was question above regarding the town
of Amsous. This priest had married his daughter to Beïsar, and she had accompanied her husband to Egypt
where she gave him a son named Misraïm. Beïsar having died, one buried him in the convent of Abou Hermès, a
name given, it is said, to the region situated to the west of the Pyramids. It was there, it is claimed, the
first cemetery where one buried in Egypt. The death of Beïsar arrived 1806 years after the time of the
flood." Another author says: "Then Misraïm built a town to which he gave his name. A descendant of Japhet
came to him and raised for him a vertical wall and made a machine with rungs, thanks to the perfection of
which he raised the water to the summit of the wall whence this water redescended into the town to be
employed there without fatigue and without cost, and [...]

[PDF p. 424]

came out on another side. And on the wall one put the inscription: This is the work of a mortal and not the
work of the Eternal."

After Beïsar reigned his son Misraïm (also called Masr) ben Beïsar. Qlimoun discovered for him the
treasures of Egypt, taught him its writing, and instructed him in the science of the Egyptians. Misraïm
founded towns, dug canals, planted trees, and constructed a magnificent town to which he gave the name of
Darsan and which is the same as El 'Arish. From a woman of the caste of the priests he had a son named
Qoftim; then he built the town of Rakoudah, site of the future Alexandria. At his death, one made him an
underground passage 150 cubits long, all covered with white marble; in the middle was a pedestal plated
with leaves of gold and provided with four doors above each of which was a statue of gold, bearing on the
head a crown of gold and seated on a throne of gold with feet of emerald. On the chest of each of the
statues one engraved verses destined to protect the body, enclosed in a vat in the form of a human body,
made of green emerald and 40 cubits long. With him was buried all that his treasures contained -- gold,
silver, precious stones -- among others: a thousand pieces of cut emerald, a thousand statuettes of precious
stones, a thousand vases of gold filled with admirable pearls, a thousand cups of gold, a great number of
ingots of silver. One placed on the body a talisman to defend it against whoever would attempt to approach,
and one engraved on the tomb: "He is dead, Misraïm, the son of Beïsar, the son of Cham, the son of Noah,
2600 years (or according to others 2700) after the flood; never did he adore the idols, and he has departed
toward the garden where there is neither old age, nor sickness, nor chagrin, nor sadness. He has written
here the name of the very great God who will permit no one to approach him, save a king who will appear at
the end of time and who will proclaim the religion of the king of justice and will believe in the
resurrection, in the holy Book, and in the Prophet propagator of the true faith at the end of the ages."
Then one rolled above the underground passage enormous rocks on which one spread sand, forming thus a
barrier between two opposed mountains.

Masr ben Beïsar was, it is said, in the ark with the grandfather of his father, Noah, and the latter prayed
God that he might accord to Masr to inhabit the excellent and blessed land, mother of the nations and refuge
of the faithful, whose river is the purest of rivers, asking that he put in it the best of his blessings,
that he subject the world to Masr and his descendants, that

[PDF p. 425]

for them he render the earth easy, and that he give them all power over it. Masr asked his grandfather to
describe to him this land, and Noah described it to him; and Beïsar having become old and feeble, his son
took him with all his brothers to Egypt where they installed themselves, and it is from him that this
country took the name of Masr.

After him reigned his son Qobtim, also called Qoft ben Misraïm. He was the first who executed marvelous
things after the flood, extracting the metals, digging canals, raising stelae and towers, and making
talismans.

It is recounted that after the death of Misraïm, discord set in among his children, of whom Qoft was the
youngest; having gathered near the pyramids, they decided that the empire would be the share of the one who
would vanquish his brothers. Ashmoun and Atrib struggled first and Atrib was vanquished; then Sa struggled
against Ashmoun and Ashmoun was vanquished; finally Sa struggled against Qoft and Qoft carried off the
victory. It was therefore Qoft who took the government after his father, and his brothers made their
submission to him. Qoft continued to inhabit Memphis, capital of his father, and married a woman who gave
him four children: Qaftarim, Ashmoun, Atrib, and Sa, who grew, multiplied, and peopled the country. At the
moment of his death, Qoft divided the land among his four children: To Qaftarim fell the territory from
Assouan to Qouft; Ashmoun had as share the country situated between Qouft and Memphis; Atrib received the
Garf entire, and Sa all the region from the Beheirah to the Occident; Qaftarim had in addition the
suzerainty over all the others. Qoft prescribed moreover to each of his sons to construct himself a town in
the territory that was attributed to him and built for himself a vault under the great mountain; this vault
was covered with marble, dormers were arranged in it for the circulation of the air, which gave rise to a
very violent current of air; one placed there balls of copper coated with a certain unguent and that lit up
like lamps night and day. After his death, his body was deposited in this vault, in a coffin of gold, after
having been clad in a robe embroidered with pearls and coral; at the head of the coffin one raised a column
of marble surmounted by a sparkling stone; around were arranged boxes in painted stones containing his books
of science; finally one placed near him his riches, his treasures, his precious objects, and one engraved on
the tomb what had been engraved on the tomb of his father. Each of his

[PDF p. 426]

children withdrew into his province; Sa withdrew with his family and his children and went to inhabit the
town of Sa of which there will be question further on.

It is recounted that the confusion of languages took place in the time of Qoft, to whom God taught by
inspiration the Coptic language; that this king kept the empire for 480 years, then that after his death he
was buried in the country of the Oases.

After him reigned his brother Ashmoun ben Masr; it is said however that, during his life, Qoft had installed
his son Qaftarim in his province and that the latter rendered it rapidly prosperous. He was a bold man of
high stature; he had extracted a quantity of metals such that never had a similar quantity been extracted
before. He built the town of Dendérah and constructed in the mountain of Qouft an elevated tower from which
one saw the Eastern sea; there he discovered mines of mercury and dug the pond that one calls the hunter of
birds. It was toward the last times of his reign that 'Ad was annihilated by the wind. In his time the
demons made reappear the idols that the flood had submerged, and one adored them. He kept the empire for
480 years.

Ibn Abd el Hakem reports: After Masr ben Beïsar reigned Qoft ben Masr; after Qoft reigned his brother
Ashmoun, then Atrib ben Masr, then Sa ben Masr, then his son Todras ben Sa, then Mâliq ben Todras, then
Hazaba ben Mâliq, then Kalkala ben Hazaba. It is recounted that when Ashmoun had taken the empire after his
brother, Sheddâd ben Haddad ben Sheddad ben 'Ad marched against him, seized the land of Egypt, destroyed
its edifices, built the pyramids, and directed himself toward the place where Alexandria later was, founded
a town there and remained there a certain time, then that, the Adites having gone out of the land of Egypt,
Ashmoun returned into his kingdom; after him reigned his brother Sa, then after Sa his son Todras: it is in
his time that God sent Saleh to the Thammoud.

Todras having died, his son Mâliq El Budsir succeeded him; he was one of the most audacious men and of a
high stature who executed magnificent works, among others: a tower surmounted by a quadrangular cupola; on
each face opened a dormer from which, on certain days of the year known to all, came out a thick smoke of
different colors, each color having a particular signification: the green smoke indicated fertility and
abundance for that year; the white smoke was a sign of dearth and misery; the

[PDF p. 427]

red smoke presaged wars or attacks of enemies; the yellow smoke announced fires or deaths caused by the
king; the black smoke was a sign of rains, of inundations, of upheavals of the soil; the smoke of mixed
colors presaged innumerable calamities and injustices committed by people one toward another. He made also
a tree of copper that attracted all the wild beasts; these came to attach themselves to it and remained
there until one had taken them; thus the Egyptians were able to nourish themselves on the flesh of the wild
beasts. One day, it happened that a crow burst the eye of a young boy of the caste of the priests and tore
it out. The king then fabricated a tree of copper on which was placed a crow, the wings deployed, holding
in its claws a serpent and bearing an inscription on the back. And the crows fell on this tree and detached
themselves from it only dead. In his time, the sand having increased in an alarming fashion on the side of
the Occident of Egypt, he raised a statue of black granite on a pedestal of the same material: on the
shoulder of the statue was placed a basket containing a shovel, signs were engraved on its face, its chest,
and its arms; it faced the Occident; before it the sands uncovered themselves and the winds brought them
back behind, where they formed high hills. This same king sent Hermes to the mountain of Qomr whence comes
the Nile; there, Hermes raised statues of copper and regularized the banks of the Nile, which before flowed
in places and in places interrupted its course; then he marched on the side of the Occident to see what was
beyond. He arrived at a vast land furrowed with streams and covered with trees; he built places of pleasure
there, installed himself there, and had come there a great number of people of his family who peopled this
country, to the point of covering all the land of the Occident; then, having found themselves in contact
with the Berbers, there arose between them wars where perished a great number of men, and the country became
a desert again and of the past state there remained only the oases. El Budsir withdrew himself from the
regards of men, showing himself only from time to time on his throne, and often he addressed the word to his
subjects without these seeing him.

Abou-l Hassan El Masa'oudi, in his book Accounts of the Time, recounts that the first who was really a
magician and changed the religion to adore the planets was El Budsir. The Copts affirm that the planets
conversed with him. To him are attributed numerous marvels, among others this one: Having withdrawn himself
from the regards of men and retired from the affairs of the kingdom for several years, he appeared only from
time to time, once each

[PDF p. 428]

year, at the moment when the sun enters the sign of the Ram; at that moment his subjects could approach him:
he spoke to them ostensibly, prescribing them certain things, forbidding them certain others, and putting
them on guard against disobedience to his orders. He had constructed for himself a cupola of silver plated
with gold, at the summit of which he sat and from there, the face uncovered, addressed the word to his
people.

After his death reigned his son Araqlimoun, priest and magician, who executed surprising things. He sat on
the clouds, where one saw him under the features of a man of high stature, and he remained thus a long time.
Later, he abandoned the Egyptians who remained without a king, then, a certain day, they saw him under the
fiery image of the disk of the sun at the moment when it enters the sign of the Ram; he ordered them to
confer the power on 'Adim ben Qoftim, warning them that he would no longer return among them.

They therefore took for king 'Adim ben Qoftim, an audacious man of high stature. It was he who introduced
the torture of the cross into Egypt. Here is how: a man and a woman having committed the crime of adultery,
he crucified them, placing the back of one against the back of the other. He built four towns that he
provided with considerable treasures and in which he put talismans and a number of marvelous objects. He
raised also, on the shore of the Eastern sea, a tower surmounted by a statue turned toward the Orient, to
prevent the sea from invading the land of Egypt. In Nubia, he threw a bridge over the Nile. He kept the
empire for 140 years and died aged 730 years.

After him reigned his son Shaddat ben 'Adim, who is generally named Sheddad ben 'Ad; he was a priest learned
in magic, and it is he, it is said, who constructed the pyramids of Dahchour. He executed magnificent works
and marvelous talismans and constructed towns on the eastern bank (of the Nile). It is in his time that Qous
was built; he made an expedition among the Ethiopians and ravaged the country. His reign lasted 90 years;
it is he who, the first, captured birds of prey and trained them for the hunt and produced (by crossings)
the race of greyhounds. He put in the lake of Siout tamed crocodiles that attracted the crocodiles of the
Nile; one killed the latter and with their skin one covered the boats. One day, being at the hunt, his
horse overturned him, he fell into a precipice and killed himself: previously, irritated against one of his
servants, he had hurled him from the top of a high mountain and the man had been put to pieces; the same
fate reached him in his turn. At his death, one [...]

[PDF p. 429]

placed him in a naos and one buried with him his riches; one placed a talisman to defend him against whoever
would wish to do him harm, and one wrote on his tomb: "It does not befit the powerful to stray from the good
path nor to do what is forbidden; for they will be requited according to their acts. This is the naos of the
son of Shaddat son of 'Adim; he did what he ought not to have done and the same fate struck him."

After him reigned his son Minqâoush, a wise, virtuous prince and magician who did marvelous things, raised
astonishing constructions, among others, 8 parasangs from Memphis, a temple that he dedicated to the
planets, and gathered incalculable treasures; in his time, more mines were opened than under all the other
reigns. Once, having set out, he marched for a day in the direction of the South, then for a day and a day
again in the direction of the West, and arrived, on the third day, at a black mountain under which he dug
underground passages and grottoes where he buried his riches, and on the door of the underground passage he
engraved an inscription. His riches were, it is said, so considerable that he buried thus the load of twelve
hundred chariots of gold and precious stones, and for four years he sent again once a year numerous chariots
whose load was buried in this hiding place. For a very long time, one could see the trace of the wheels of
these chariots between Memphis and the Maghreb. He raised a temple to the Moon, and it is also he, it is
said, who built the town of Memphis for his daughters, who were thirty in number. He encouraged the study
of chemistry and everyone occupied himself with it night and day; by this means he gathered considerable
riches and innumerable precious stones. It is again this king who built the town of 'Aïn Shams and divided
into four parts the revenues of Egypt; a quarter for the king, a quarter for the army, a quarter for the
putting in order of the soil, and the other quarter destined to be buried to provide for events to come; he
divided also Egypt into 130 districts. He died after a reign of 91 years.

After him reigned his son 'Adim ben Menqaoush. He was powerful and no one could resist him. It is in his
time that appeared the two angels, who taught magic to men. The Copts claim that these two angels descended
first in Egypt and went next to Babel.

After him reigned his brother Menaoush ben Menqaoush, a learned and wise magician. He edified numerous
constructions in the mountain and the desert, buried considerable treasures there and raised stelae there.
He built in the

[PDF p. 430]

desert of the Occident a town where he raised a tower near which he buried incalculable riches; he planted
in this town a tree that produced all sorts of fruits. He was the first in Egypt to adore the ox; he loved
science and sought the books that treat of it. And thus all these kings strove to accomplish things more
extraordinary than those executed by their predecessors, studying with perseverance and engraving on the
stone.

After him reigned his son Hermès, a prince little learned and who did none of the things his fathers had
done; he died after a reign of 11 years.

After him reigned Ashmoun ben Qobtim ben Masr ben Beïsar ben Ham ben Nouh (Noah), whose territory extended
from Ashmoun to Memphis, to the Occident, and to the Orient as far as the sea on the side of Barqah, extreme
limit of Egypt; in the Said, it reached the frontier of Akhmim. He had established his residence in the town
of Ashmouneïn which measured twelve miles of length by an equal width. This prince built to the east of the
Nile the town of Antinoë, where he raised a magnificent palace and which he provided with edifices, circuses,
and numerous marvels. He built also the town of Tahratis and was the first who played at ball and at mallet.
It is said that he built numerous towns, in which he executed marvelous objects, among others a town raised
on the flank of the mountain, with four doors opening on the four cardinal points; on the eastern door was
the image of an eagle; on the western door that of a bull; on the northern door the image of a lion and on
the southern door that of a dog; to these images were attached spirits, and if some stranger presented
himself, he could not penetrate into the town without the permission of its guardians; under each of these
four statues were buried all sorts of treasures, and in the town one planted a tree that produced fruits of
every species; a tower was raised, of 80 cubits of height and surmounted by a cupola that, each day, colored
itself with a particular color, and this for seven days, to begin again the eighth with the initial color;
and each day the town was lit with a color similar to that emitted that day by the cupola. At the foot of
the tower circulated a canal derived from the Nile and filled with fish of all sorts; one placed around the
town talismanic statues with a human body and the head of a monkey. Ashmoun made of this town the abode of
the magicians, and it took the name of Town of the Magicians, and there one gave oneself over to all the
practices of magic. In the vicinity of this town, he built a second known under the

[PDF p. 431]

name of Town of the Marvels. He constructed also, in the middle of the Nile, pavilions plated with colored
glass, and dug an underground passage connecting Ashmouneïn to Antinoë. To him is attributed also the
foundation of the town of 'Aïn Shams, and it is asserted that he reigned 800 years, but that toward the
600th year of his reign, the Adites ravished the power from him and remained in Egypt for 90 years after
which, chased out by the plague, they withdrew on Medina, by the road of the Hedjaz to the Ouadi-l Qora.
Ashmoun recovered the kingdom after the departure of the Adites. It is to him that is due the institution of
the Nourouz in Egypt, and it is in his time that was constructed the town of Bahnesa. At his death, one dug
him a naos at the extreme frontier of Ashmouneïn, one buried him there with his magnificent treasures and
numerous marvels, such as a thousand vases containing drugs composed according to precise formulas: on the
naos one engraved his name and his genealogy and a talisman was placed there to protect him.

After him reigned his son Sa, to whom succeeded his son Todras or, according to others, Menaqioush, a bold
and virtuous prince, who actively pushed the cultivations and the construction, building villages, raising
stelae, and executing astonishing marvels. He founded towns, among others the town of Akhmim, to which he
assigned priests. He reigned forty and some years, and at his death one buried him in the eastern pyramid
and his treasures with him.

After him reigned his son, on whose name there is no agreement. He was a wise prince, resolute and venerated
by the Egyptians. He founded the first hospital, and the first established special places for the exercises
of the body. It is in his time that was built the town of Santaryah in the desert of the Oases. But his
wives having become jealous on his account, one of them killed him with a knife-blow; one buried him in a
naos with his riches, and one made him a preservative talisman.

After him reigned his son Merqourah, a learned magician, who first tamed the lions and used them as mounts;
he built towns, founded temples, raised statues. At his death, one buried him in a naos in the desert of the
Occident and one buried his riches with him.

After him reigned his son Bilâtes; as he was still very young, it was his mother who took charge of the
direction of the affairs of the kingdom; of an energetic character, she administered the Empire with skill
and behaved according to equity, lightening the tax of her subjects who adored her. Her son, having become

[PDF p. 432]

grown, gave himself over to the hunt and his mother executed for him marvelous things. Bilâtes reigned 13
years after which he died of smallpox, and the power passed to his uncles.

After him reigned Atrib ben Qobtim ben Misraïm, thirteenth king after the flood. He built the town of Atrib
and lived 500 years of which he reigned 360. Under his reign, it is said, the Nile remained without floods
for 140 years and the animals disappeared from the land of Egypt; one no longer met a single one. Atrib went
pensive, stretching and clenching his hands, torn by hunger; the greatest part of the Egyptians succumbed to
the famine. Subsequently, the abundance returned, the ease only increased for 200 years; to such a point
that the ardeb (of wheat) sold for a dâneq (1/6 of the drachma) and less. At his death, his brother Sa was
accused of having assassinated him; he had to sustain against the Egyptians wars that lasted nine years,
after which he was killed.

After Atrib reigned his daughter Tadrourah, a skillful magician, who directed the kingdom in a superior
fashion and regulated the affairs admirably. She made marvelous talismans, one among others that prevented
the wild beasts and the birds from drinking at the Nile, so much so that almost all died of thirst. In her
time, a great cry made itself heard, the earth trembled at it, opened, and engulfed the queen.

After her reigned her brother Qlimoun ben Atrib, a learned and wise prince, who raised edifices and executed
talismans. In his time, was constructed the town of Tennis the ancient, as well as the town of Damietta; he
reigned 90 years and, after his death, was buried in a naos.

After him reigned his son Farsoun, a wise magician, who built towns and multiplied the temples. While he was
still a young man, a Himyarite king attacked him at the head of a considerable army. Farsoun marched to meet
him and rejoined him at the town of Aïlia; a fierce combat was engaged in which perished the major part of
the two armies and where the Egyptians employed a little of their magic. The Himyarite took flight with the
few men who remained to him, and Farsoun, having killed the greatest part of the enemies and having seized
all they had brought with them, returned triumphant to Memphis. He raised, on the shore of the sea of
Qolzoum, a tower surmounted by a mirror that attracted the ships to the shore and did not permit them to
take the sea again except after having acquitted the duty with which the king struck them. He reigned 260
years and, at his death, was buried in a naos, behind the black mountain

[PDF p. 433]

of the Orient. There one had made a cupola surrounded by twelve houses each enclosing a marvelous object.
With him one buried his treasures, and on the tomb was placed a preservative talisman.

After him succeeded four kings, then the kingdom fell to Sa, son of Qobtim, the youngest of the sons of this
prince and his favorite.

Sa having died, Nourriat the magician succeeded him. This magician sat on a throne of fire. If someone came
to bring a complaint before her and he was in his right, the fire drew aside without doing him harm; if on
the contrary he was in the wrong, the fire seized him. Each day, Nourriat took a great number of different
forms. She built herself a palace where she withdrew, and in the wall of this palace she installed hollow
tubes of copper and wrote, above the mouth of these tubes, one of the formulas to which could have recourse
the persons who would come to bring a complaint before her. Whoever came for a matter stopped before the
tube relative to his case, setting forth his request and questioning in a low voice. When he had finished,
he applied the ear to the tube and received the answer to his question. This palace and these tubes remained
until the time when they were destroyed by Bokhta-Nasar (Nebuchadnezzar).

After her reigned Marqounos, a wise and learned prince. He had for mother the daughter of the king of Nubia;
this princess executed marvelous things. In his time, all sorts of prodigious objects were fabricated. He
reigned 73 years and died at the age of 240 years.

After him reigned his son Aïsad, aged 45 years, a bold prince with an insolent gaze. He lay with the wife of
his father and displayed his liaison with her. The greatest of his passions was diversion and play. He gave
free access to all the religions in his Empire, abandoned the sciences, neglected the temples and the
priests, and ceased to occupy himself with the affairs of his subjects. He raised on the shore of the Nile
palaces to divert himself there and spent in pleasures considerable sums. He was hated by his subjects whom
he abhorred and who ended by poisoning him; he died aged less than 120 years.

After him reigned his son Sa. One gives to this prince the name of Sa ben Marqounos; if that is exact, he
was the brother of Aïsad. He established his residence in Memphis and his subjects founded on him great
hopes. Having made himself master of all the provinces, he executed there marvelous things and talismans,
put the priests back in their rank, chased out the criminals and the perverse, [...]

[PDF p. 434]

and abolished the penalties established by his father, honored his temple and prayed for him. He built a
town inside the Oases, raised near the sea numerous stelae, and established at all the points of the kingdom
couriers charged with informing him of what happened at the frontiers. On the two banks of the Nile he
raised towers, at the summit of which one lit fires when something unforeseen occurred or an enemy advanced
to attack the country. He constructed on the shore of the sea a tower, thanks to which one knew all that
happened on the sea. He built also, it is said, the greatest part of the town of Memphis and all the superb
edifices of Alexandria. When he had gathered in his hand the country entire, he assembled the scholars,
examined the stars, a science in which he was very versed, and recognized that Egypt would inevitably be
submerged by the Nile, then ravaged by a man come from the side of Syria; he therefore gathered all the
workers of Egypt and constructed a town in the extreme Oasis. A Frankish king came to attack him and seized
the town of Memphis; with him advanced a thousand ships, and Alexandria having been in great part destroyed,
the fleet entered the Nile at Rosetta and the Frankish king made himself master of Memphis, whence Sa had
fled to take refuge in the towns of the interior where he had fortified himself against his enemy. Sa
protected the town that served him as asylum by means of talismans and maintained himself there a long time;
then his turn came, the enemy was put to rout, and Sa returned to Memphis, pursued the priests, killed a
great number of them, and after a reign of 67 years died aged 170 years.

After him reigned his son Todras who extended his power over all the provinces and whose reign over Egypt
was tranquil. He was energetic, adroit, vigorous, tenacious, and versed in affairs. He gave proof of equity,
put in excellent state the temples and their personnel, raised a chapel to Venus, dug the canal of Sakha,
made war on an Amalecite of Syria, entered Palestine, killed there a number of people, and brought back a
part of the inhabitants captive to Egypt. Wishing to make an expedition to the country of the Blacks against
the Zing and the Ethiopians, he launched on the Nile 300 boats, met the Blacks, to the number of a million
men, put them to rout, killed the greatest number, and led away a considerable crowd of prisoners; he
brought back also to Egypt elephants and tigers and raised, on the frontiers of his country, towers on which
he wrote his name, his campaigns, and his triumph. It is in his time that God sent his prophet Saleh to the
Thammoud, and it is he also,

[PDF p. 435]

it is said, who made the Nubians inhabit where they are today; here is why: during the campaign of Ethiopia
and his march against the Blacks, he met a people who read the books of Adam, of Seth, and of Idris; he
rallied to their faith and made them descend into a country situated a month's march from the land of Egypt;
these were the Nubians. He died at Memphis.

After him reigned his son Mâliq, an intelligent, generous prince, beautiful of face, experienced, who walked
on the traces of his father. The Egyptians adored the planets and the ox, while he adored a single God like
his ancestors Qobtim and Misraïm, for which the Copts blamed him. One day, the order was given to prepare
the best war-horses, to procure arms and gather travel-provisions, then 200 boats having been launched on
the Western sea, the king set out followed by a considerable army that followed him both by land and by sea;
he reached thus the country of the Berbers, put them to flight and massacred the greatest part of them, then
arrived at Ifriqiah, passed into Spain wishing to reach the country of the Franks. He passed among no people
without subjugating it. The king of the Franks went to meet him; they fought for a month; at the end, the
king of the Franks asked for peace and made presents to Mâliq who left him and went to subjugate the peoples
of the littoral of the Green sea. The Copts recount that this king saw seventy marvels, that he raised stelae
on the shore of the sea, that he engraved there his name and his campaigns, that he destroyed the towns of
the Berbers; on his return, the people of Egypt went before him with all sorts of perfumes and all the
apparatus of feasts; one covered the roads with carpets on his passage; the kings dreaded him and sent him
presents; and he believed in the unity of God until his death.

After him reigned his son Hazaba. He was of a soft and even character; his father had taught him the religion
of the single God and had turned him away from the cult of the idols, but after the death of his father, he
returned to the religious practices of his people. Wishing to undertake an expedition into India and against
the country of the Blacks, he had fabricated a hundred boats similar to the Indian boats and set out taking
with him his wives and the principal personages of his court and leaving on the throne of Egypt his son
Kalkala, still a child, near whom he put a priest as vizier. This done, he disembarked on the shore of the
Yemen, pillaged the towns of the region, and reached Serendib (Ceylon) whose inhabitants he treated cruelly;
from there he went to the islands situated between India and China,

[PDF p. 436]

reduced the inhabitants of them to obedience, and remained long years in these islands. The expedition
lasted, it is said, 17 years, after which he returned laden with booty. Dreaded by the kings, he built a
number of temples and raised statues to the planets; then he ravaged the coast of Syria, subjugated the
inhabitants of it, and returned to Egypt; he ravaged equally Nubia and the country of the Blacks, and struck
the inhabitants with tributes that they had to bring him. He restored the prestige of the priests and their
books. He had seen that these victories would be accorded to him with the help of the planets. He died after
having reigned 75 years.

He was replaced by his son Kalkala, who was proclaimed king at Alexandria, where he stayed for a month
before going to Memphis. He was an adorer of the idols and the people of Egypt were with him. He loved the
sciences and created marvelous things. He honored the scholars and heaped privileges on them. He occupied
himself with chemistry and amassed considerable treasures in the deserts of the West. He was the first to
spread in Egypt the science of chemistry that, until then, one practiced only in secret, certain kings of
his predecessors having forbidden the practice of it. Kalkala gave himself over to it and filled the houses
of science with it, to the point that never was gold more abundant in Egypt than in his time, and never was
the revenue of Egypt as considerable, for under his reign it reached more than 110,000,000 metsqals. The
Egyptians had become rich thanks to the products of the mines. He fabricated also a great quantity of colored
and transparent stones as well as turquoises and other jewels; he created things that surpass reason, so much
so that one surnamed him the Sage of the Kings; he surpassed in science all the priests, teaching them things
that were hidden from them. The Nemrod (Nimrod) of Abraham lived in his time; this prince, having heard
speak of the magical science of Kalkala, invited him to come to him. He was an audacious man of fierce
aspect who dwelt in the countryside of Iraq; God had accorded him vigor, strength, power, and he commanded
numerous peoples. According to the Copts, Nemrod, after having sent his invitation to Kalkala, made known to
him that he would meet him at a determined place. Kalkala therefore went to this place on a chariot carried
by four winged horses, surrounded by a light brilliant as fire, and escorted by terrible images in the midst
of which he flew at the gallop of his horses. He bore, in the way of a belt, a serpent coiled on itself and
the mouth open, and he struck it with a wand of myrtle. At his sight, Nemrod, seized with terror, recognized
his superiority

[PDF p. 437]

in science and asked him for his protection. It is recounted that Kalkala went up to sit on the western
pyramid, under a cupola raised above his head. And the people of the country, when a calamity fell upon them,
gathered around the pyramid, where the king remained days without eating or drinking. Once, he disappeared
for a certain time, so much so that one believed him dead; the kings then became audacious and one of them, a
king of the Occident, advanced with a considerable army and arrived at the Ouadi Habib. But Kalkala arrived
in his turn and having, thanks to his magic, gathered clouds laden with a stifling heat, he covered with them
the enemy army that for days and days could not free itself from this heat. Then Kalkala flew toward Egypt and
gave the order to his people to march to meet the enemies; and the Egyptians found them all dead, them and
their mounts. Thus the priests dreaded Kalkala more than they had feared any of his predecessors. This prince
lived a long time still, then disappeared and never again did one hear speak of him. According to Ibn Abd el
Hakem, Kalkala was son of Hazaba; he reigned in Egypt about a hundred years and died without leaving
children.

Then reigned his brother Malia ben Hazaba. Ibn Ouacif Shah says: "Then reigned his brother Malia; he was a
gluttonous man who ate and drank to excess, giving himself over solitarily to his pleasures and neglecting
absolutely the sciences. He confided the affairs to his vizier and abandoned himself to the women; he
possessed eighty of them. His son Toutis threw himself upon him, one day when he was drunk, and killed him as
well as the woman who was then with him."

After him reigned his son Toutis. It is said that this prince is the same as A'mr ben 'Amrou-l Qeis ben
Babilioun ben Himyar ben Sala ben Yashgab ben Ya'reb ben Qohtan; others name him El Oualid ben El Rian. He is
one of the Pharaohs (Shepherds) of Egypt, who descend from Dan ben Fahloug ben Amraz ben Ashoud ben Sam ben
Nouh; it is said also that the Pharaohs of Egypt were of the race of the first Amalec ben Laoud ben Sam ben
Nouh. Toutis was a man enemy of disorder, bold, hard, haughty, and dreaded. The Copts claim that he was the
first Pharaoh of Egypt; it is the Pharaoh of Abraham. The Pharaohs were, it is said, seven in number, and
Toutis was the first of them. He dug a canal to the east of Egypt, at the foot of the mountain, in order to
be able to go by boats to the sea. He sent to Hagar, mother of Ismaïl, of whom he himself had made present to
Abraham, wheat and all sorts of grains that he brought as far as Djeddah; he could thus make the Hedjaz live
for a certain time, and it is recounted that all that was then beautiful at the Caaba had been given by the
king of Egypt. And what Toutis had sent to the Hedjaz was so considerable that the Arabs of the tribe of
Gorham surnamed him the Generous.

[PDF p. 438]

One reads in the book of Orosius that in the time of Abraham the government of Egypt was in the hands of a
people named the Benou Faliq ben Darech and that their reign lasted in Egypt 120 years. Ibn Ishaq, speaking
of one of them, says: "The Pharaohs of Egypt were descendants of Dan ben Fahloug ben Amraz ben Ashoud ben Sam
ben Nouh. The most widespread opinion makes them Amalecites. Among them one counts El Rian ben El Oualid; it
is asserted that El Oualid ben El Rian was the Pharaoh of Joseph, and El Oualid ben Mo'sab the Pharaoh of
Moses; among them one counts also Senan ben 'Alouan." Ibn Ouacif Shah says that one gave to the latter the
name of Pharaoh only because he committed many murders, sparing only a very intelligent girl, who, terrified
by the number of his crimes, poisoned him in his 170th year.

After him reigned Gouriaq; this princess treated her subjects with kindness, amassed riches, honored the
priests, the scholars, and the magicians, extended their power, and multiplied the temples. Those who did
not wish to submit to her authority went to the town of Atrib and chose for king a man of the lineage of
Atrib. The account of what concerns him is found in the chapter of Alexandria. Gouriaq is the first woman of
the family of Noah who was queen of Egypt.

After her death, her cousin Zalfa bent Mamoun succeeded her. She was a wise and intelligent virgin who
treated her subjects with gentleness. Aïmen the Atribite revolted against her and called to his aid the king
of the Amalecites who dispatched to him a general. Zalfa sent to meet him an army; the two troops joined at
El Arich and, after a combat where a great number of men perished, the partisans of Zalfa fled to Memphis,
pursued by the enemies. Zalfa withdrew into the Said and stopped at Ashmouneïn, and the war continued
between her and the Amalecites, a war in which the latter were put to rout, abandoned Memphis after having
devastated it, and withdrew into the Gorf where they fortified themselves. Egypt was then divided into two
parts; Zalfa recommenced the war, but, after three months of struggle, had to retrograde as far as Qous,
pursued by Aïmen; seeing herself on the point of being taken, she poisoned herself. Ibn Abd el Hakem says:
[...]

[PDF p. 439]

"Toutis ben Malia having died, his daughter Gouriaq, his only child, succeeded him. At the death of Gouriaq,
the government passed into the hands of her cousin Zalfa bent Mamoun ben Malia who lived a long time... Then
they grew and multiplied and filled the land of Egypt entire. And the Amalecites bore them envy, and the
country was ravaged by El Oualid ben Douma' who delivered them terrible combats. The Egyptians consented to
recognize him for king, and he reigned over them for nearly a hundred years. Then, filled with pride and
injustice, he abandoned himself to all the turpitudes, and God unleashed against him a ferocious beast that
put him to pieces and devoured his flesh."

There were five Pharaohs who reigned in Egypt.

Then reigned the fierce Aïman who put to death a great number of those who had borne arms against him. The
Amalecite El Oualid ben Douma having gone on an expedition with a considerable army, sent one of his
servants, named Fara'oun, into Egypt; the latter conquered it, and El Oualid came in his turn, subjugated
the Egyptians and, having seized their treasures, continued his march to stop only at the sources of the
Nile; he visited the mountain of Qomr and remained there, in retreat, for forty years, after which he
returned to Egypt where Fara'oun, who had taken his place, fled at his approach. El Oualid reduced the
Egyptians and reigned over them until his death -- that is, for 120 years.

After him reigned his son El Rian ben Oualid ben Douma', one of the Amalecites. He was the strongest man of
his time and the greatest king.

The Amalecites descend from Amalek ben Laoud ben Sam ben Nouh. This El Rian is the pharaoh of Joseph and
bears among the Copts the name of Nahraoush. It is said that the pharaoh of Joseph was called El Rian ben El
Oualid ben Leith ben Qarân ben 'Amr ben Amaleq ben Balqa' ben 'Aber ben Ashlikha ben Loud ben Sam ben Nouh;
the pharaoh of Joseph was, it is recounted, the grandfather of the pharaoh of Moses, being father of his
father, and his name was Barkhou. He was of high stature, beautiful of face, and intelligent. He behaved
admirably with his subjects, suppressed their taxes for three years, and divided his riches with them.

Then reigned a man of his house named Atfin; it is he whom one calls El Aziz, an intelligent man, lettered,
active, just, and desirous of rendering the country prosperous. He had made for himself a throne of silver
in the palace of the king; he took his place there and thus received the writers and the viziers; as for
Nahraoush,

[PDF p. 440]

he contented himself with what passes behind the curtain and, giving leave to the affairs, gave himself over
to pleasures; for a long time it was thus and the country only prospered; but an Amalecite having attacked
him and having marched with his army against Egypt, El Rian set out to meet him, gave battle, and having put
him to rout, pursued him, drew him into Syria, ravaged the region, and the kings, filled with fear, no longer
dared attack him. He pushed, it is said, as far as Mosul and struck with a tribute the people of Syria, then
set out for the conquest of the countries of the Occident with an army of 900,000 men, traversed the
territory of the Berbers of whom he subjugated the greatest number, and skirting the Green sea, directed
himself toward the South, conquered Nubia, and returned finally to Memphis. For what passed between him and
Joseph, one will find the account in the chapter of the Fayoum.

After him reigned his son Drimoush who is also called Darem ben El Rian; it is the fourth Pharaoh; but he did
not follow the traditions of his father. He still had for intendant Joseph, but sometimes he accepted his
advice, sometimes he repulsed it. In his time was discovered a mine of silver from which he drew considerable
riches. It is under his reign that Joseph died, whom he replaced, as vizier, by a man who did the greatest
harm to the Egyptians, appropriating their riches and gathering thus considerable treasures. His turpitude
became such that he carried off from their families all the pretty women of the town of Memphis, and as soon
as he learned that in such or such a place was a beautiful woman, he went there and had her brought to him;
troubled by these exactions, the people despised him and deserted the factories, the workshops, and the
markets. The vizier treated him as an enemy and killed a great number of them; finally he became so
execrated that one revolted against him. He then became gentler again, suppressed the taxes for three years,
and distributed money to the rebels, which silenced them. In his time, the Copts rose against the Israelites
and asked the vizier to expel them from Egypt, and they insisted so much that they ended by obtaining their
case. The king, then retired into the Said, learned the news and menaced the Egyptians who gathered, rose
against him, and declared war on him; a great number of them perished; the rest had to undergo the
oppression; some were killed, others hanged on the two banks of the Nile; after which the king returned to
his old habits, appropriating the riches of his subjects and carrying off their women; the principal of the
Copts and the Israelites were reduced to

[PDF p. 441]

slavery, and all had to undergo his tyranny. Having embarked on the Nile for some diversion, a violent wind
was unleashed against him; he drowned, and his body was found again only in the province of Shatnouf, it is
said, between Tara and Helouan.

Then the vizier put forward his son Ma'adious, still a child, and who is also called Mo'dân. The latter
suppressed the taxes established by his father and behaved admirably; under his reign the affairs were put
back in order and he returned to their families the women carried off under the preceding reign. It is the
fifth of the Pharaohs, and one refers to his time the flood of Egypt. The Israelites had multiplied and
hated the idols. One cantoned them in a region distant from the country so that they would not mix with the
others, and one assigned them a territory to the south of Memphis where they gathered and built an oratory.
A Canaanite having seized Syria forbade the Syrians to pay the tribute they owed to Egypt and excited the
population against Mo'dân. The subjects of the latter exhorted him to march to combat, but he refused and
took refuge in a temple. It is claimed that he shut himself up in the temple of Saturn to pray, and that
Saturn manifested itself to him and spoke to him: "I have," it said, "established you as sovereign of the
inhabitants of your country and I have accorded you the power over them and over others still; I will raise
you up to me, but do not cease to glorify me." And the king grew proud in his heart and, filled with
arrogance, had himself called lord (God), and disdained to occupy himself with the affairs of the kingdom at
the head of which he put his son Aksamès.

His son Aksamès therefore took the government of the kingdom. One gives still to this prince the name of
Kâsem ben Ma'dan. He put the people back in their rank, divided the country into districts and provinces,
occupied himself with inventions useful to the prosperity of the country and to the development of industry;
he increased the ease of his people, had the temples repaired, made new their costumes and furniture, and
augmented the offerings. It is he whom one calls Kâshem ben Mo'dân ben Darem ben El Rian ben El Oualid ben
Douma' the Amalecite; he is the sixth Pharaoh. This name of Pharaoh comes from the first Fara'oun whose name
has transmitted itself to all the arrogant monarchs. The situation of Aksamès became greater and greater, his
power extended. He raised numerous stelae around Memphis, built a great number of towns, lighthouses, and
talismans. He reigned for seven years, managing admirably the affairs and, when the vizier of his father
died, he replaced him by a man of the caste

[PDF p. 442]

of the slaves, named Zalma ben Qoumès, a violent man, but a magician, sorcerer, learned writer, and versed in
all the sciences. He took pleasure in the exercise of power, organized the affairs of the kingdom, and built
towns on the two banks of the Nile; having read in the stars that some event was to occur, he had
constructed on the side of Alexandria and in the Said circuses and edifices. The Copts gathered to ask him
for the departure of the Israelites, but he answered them: "The Israelites are your servants; lower them from
now on." Then he set out for the countries of the Berbers and ravaged, killed, pillaged. In his time was
built the tower of Alexandria, and the sea, having risen, submerged a great number of villages, gardens, and
edifices. Aksamès died after having reigned 31 years, and during eleven of these years Zalma, his vizier,
had directed the affairs. At his death, there was a great emotion among the people; one accused Zalma of
having poisoned him, but Zalma remained in power.

Then reigned Latis ben Aksamès, a bold, vain, and hard prince; he prescribed certain things, forbade others,
and obliged the people to work, saying: "I am loyal and you are not; now, if you stray from the straight
path, I will stray from you." And he lowered certain personages below their rank, removed Zalma from the
vizierate and replaced him; Zalma was exiled into the Said with all the Israelites, and the king multiplied
the construction of temples, built villages, and opened a great number of mines; he buried in the desert of
the Orient considerable treasures and devoted himself to science. Later, pride seized him and his successes
exalted him; he forbade everyone, priest or other, to sit in the reception hall; each had to hold himself
standing until the moment of withdrawing. His injustice and his hardness toward his subjects went
increasing; by his order, no one could possess more than the necessary and each was reduced to the
indispensable; he appropriated the riches, sought the women, diverted himself with them, and did worse than
his predecessors. The Israelites were reduced to slavery, a considerable quantity of priests were put to
death; thus he was detested by all in general and by each in particular. Zalma, who had taken refuge in the
Said, was recalled by the Egyptians; but Latis gave the order to dismiss him from his functions of governor;
Zalma refused to obey, fought the troops sent against him, advanced, and entered Memphis.

Zalma ben Qoumès is the pharaoh of Moses. His name was, it is said, El Oualid ben Mous'ab ben El Rahoun ben
El Helout ben Qarân ben 'Amr ben

[PDF p. 443]

Amaleq ben Balqa' ben 'Aber ben Ashlîkha ben Loud ben Sam ben Nouh; he was of the race of the Amalecites,
but of small stature, the beard long; his right eye was very large, his left eye very small; moreover, he
was lame. It is claimed that he was Copt and that the Egyptians know perfectly his genealogy and that of his
family; one says other things still. His history will be recounted in the chapter that treats of the church
of Damouah. Here is what Ibn 'Abd el Hakem says: When God had drowned Pharaoh, there remained after him no
one of the great ones of the country; only the slaves, the mercenaries, and the women remained. And the most
noble of the women of Egypt concerted to name a queen, and their choice fell on a woman named Daloukah.

Then reigned Daloukah, daughter of Zaba, who is also called Daloukah, daughter of Qarân. She was intelligent,
energetic, and instructed, moreover one of the most noble of the women of Egypt. At the moment of her
elevation to power, she was aged 160 years. She constructed, to defend Egypt against the enemies, a wall that
extended from the frontiers of the Zings to Ifriqiah, to the Oases, and to Nubia; and all along this wall
were doors where guardians watched day and night, maintaining fires that never went out; in six months, she
had finished building this wall around Egypt; it is that which one calls the "wall of the old woman." It is
in her time that the sorceress Tadourah built the temples that are in the middle of Memphis. The reign of
Daloukah lasted 20 years at the end of which reached his majority a young man of the race of the great ones
of Egypt named:

Darkoun ben Bilâtis; the latter, at his death, was replaced by his son Toudesat, to whom succeeded Adqash
who reigned only three years; at his death, he was replaced by his brother Marina ben Marinous; Marina having
died was replaced by Astades ben Marina, a proud, violent, and sanguinary prince, who made show of so many
vices that one ended by revolting against him and killing him. In his place was elected a man of the caste
of the nobles, named Baltous ben Minâkil, who reigned over them 40 years; at his death, his son Malous
succeeded him, and, Malous having died, his brother Minâkîl ben Baltous ben Minakil became king and kept the
power a long time. His son Noulah ben Minakil reigned after him for 120 years; it is he the lame king who
subjugated the king of Jerusalem and brought him back to Egypt; he was proud and arrogant, and his pride
reached a degree to which had not yet attained the pride of any of his predecessors since the Pharaohs. This
prince died from a fall from a horse; one had surnamed him "the Lame" because [...]

[PDF p. 444]

during the pillage of Jerusalem, after having annihilated the Jews and taken their king Josiah, son of
Amoun, son of Manasseh, son of Hezekiah, he wished to mount on the throne of the prophet Soliman (Solomon),
son of David; now, to this throne one acceded by a step on which one could mount only with the two feet at
the same time; Noulah wished to mount it with a single foot, the right foot, but the step fell on his other
leg which was broken; and he felt it until his death, whence his surname of "the lame."

After him reigned Marinous ben Noulah, who governed very long; he was replaced by his son Qerqourah who
reigned 60 years; at his death, his brother Niqas ben Marinous succeeded him; in his time the temples were
destroyed and no one could raise them again. Niqas having died, his son Qoumis ben Niqas succeeded him and
reigned a long time; Bokhta Nasar (Nebuchadnezzar), having made war on him, killed him and ravaged the town
of Memphis and other towns of Egypt; he led away in captivity the Egyptians and left in the country no one,
so much so that the land of Egypt remained for 40 years ruined and deserted.

In the translation of the book of the Spaniard Orosius, entitled "Description of the Dynasties and the
Wars," one reads: 107 years after the Pharaoh of Moses had drowned, there was in Egypt a king named
Noûcherdis who killed the guests and the strangers, immolating them to his idols to which he presented their
blood as offerings; 328 years after this same date there was in Egypt a king named Beroubah whose reign was
admirable and the government powerful; he conquered by arms numerous provinces on the side of the South, by
land and by water; it is he the first who had dealings with the peoples of Roum who later took the name of
Goths. He had sent them a messenger to invite them to obedience, threatening them with war. "It is unworthy
of a powerful king," they answered, "to make war on a poor people; the fate of war is hazardous, and victory
as well as defeat are always unforeseen issues. Far from bending before your insolence, we will hold our
heads up to your attack." And they prepared to keep their word. Pharaoh having set out, they went to meet
him, put him to rout, seized his camp and the riches that were there and the treasures of Pharaoh, then,
continuing their route, they sacked the country of Egypt, and they would almost have made themselves masters
of it if a great mass of mud had not barred their road. They therefore directed themselves toward Syria,
continued their wars there, enslaved the Syrians, and obliged them to pay them tribute; and they remained
thus 15 years

[PDF p. 445]

making war against whoever held his head up to them, sacking and pillaging; they would never have returned
to their country if some of their women had not come to say to them: "If you do not come to acquit
yourselves toward us of your conjugal duties, we will ask children of our neighbors." Then they returned to
their country, the hands full of riches, leading away numerous flocks and innumerable packages, and leaving
behind them a dreaded memory. Five hundred years after the death in the waters of the Pharaoh of Moses and
the reign of Dalouka, the kings of Madian seized, it is said, Egypt, from which they were chased out by the
prophet of God Soliman, son of David. The empire then returned to the hands of the Copts, and, Galout
(Goliath) ben Balout having been killed by David, his son Galout ben Galout went to Egypt where reigned the
kings of Madian who installed him in the country as king of the western region; he remained there a certain
time, but at the end he set out for the countries of the Occident. The Copts, it is said, reigned in Egypt
after Dalouka and her son for 620 years; the number of their kings is 27: Diosqoulita, 78 years or,
according to others, 88 years; Samânadous, 26 years; Soumanas, 100 years; Moufkaras, 4 years; Amânâqoûnâs,
9 years; Ashouris, 6 years; Fasinakhes, 9 years; Fasousanes, 35 years; Sesounakhousis, 21 years; Asalioun,
15 years; Tafalounis, 13 years; Matafanastalas, 25 years; Asarathoun, 9 years; Fosameres, 10 years;
Aoufaïnouas, 44 years; Sayaqour, 12 years; Sakhis the Ethiopian, 12 years; Tarahouch the Ethiopian, 20
years; Amras the Ethiopian, 12 years; Astatafinias, 7 years; Bakhfasous, 6 years; Yakhou, 8 years;
Fasamamaltiqoush, 44 years; Bahnouqa, 6 years; Fasamartas, 17 years; Ouafris, 25 years; Amaseles, 42 years.

After these kings, reigned in Egypt five kings of the kings of Babel: Amartiouch, 6 years; Mafartas, 7
years; Aukhris, 12 years; Fasamout, 2 years; Moutatous, 7 years.

Then reigned three kings of Assour (Assyria); they are the Garmakides who reigned at Mosul and in
Mesopotamia: Nafatanebouch, 13 years; Tous, 7 years; Nafataninas, 18 years.

Then from them the empire passed to Alexander, son of Philip the Greek. All these names are Roumi (Greek),
and perhaps the kings who bore these names, or at least a part, reigned after Dalouka. Between Bokhtanasar
and the Flood, there are 2356 years and some months. This figure agrees with what is said in the Jewish law.
Between the Flood and the ruin of Jerusalem by Bokhta Nasar, there are 2684 years; which differs a little
from what we have borrowed from Masa'oudi. And God knows it better than anyone.

[PDF p. 446]

CHAPTER IV
OF THE TOWN OF ALEXANDRIA

This town is one of the greatest and most ancient of the world. It was built several times; the first time,
it was after the Flood, in the time of Misraïm ben Beïsar, son of Noah; it was called then Raqoudah.
Subsequently, it was rebuilt twice, and, in the time of the Greeks, it was enlarged by Alexander the
Macedonian, son of Philip, the same who vanquished Dara (Darius) and subjugated the Empire of the Persians,
120 solar years after the destruction of Memphis by Bokhta Nasar. It then took the name of Alexander and,
after this prince had extended its importance, it substituted itself for the town of Memphis in the role of
capital of Egypt, a role it conserved until the conquest of Islam and the arrival of 'Amr ben El 'As who, at
the head of the Muslim army, made himself master of the citadel and of Alexandria. From this moment, Egypt
became a province of Islam, and the role of capital passed from Alexandria to Fostat-Masr. God willing, I
will recount to you all that I have been able to learn of the history of Alexandria.

Abou-l Hassan El Masa'oudi, in his book Accounts of the Time, says: The Koukah, conquering tribe of the
people of Aïlat, seized the land and divided it into thirty districts and four great divisions, each
division forming a province; in each of these provinces was built a town where resided a king who sat on a
throne of gold; near the king was a temple -- that is, a house of science -- and a temple dedicated to a
planet and containing idols of gold. Alexandria, which one named then Raqoudah, comprised fifteen districts;
it is there that were installed the principal of the priests, and its temples enclosed more statues of gold
than those of the other towns; one counted there two hundred statues of gold. The Said was divided into
eighty districts distributed in four provinces and comprising thirty towns, all filled with marvels.

Ptolemy, in his book Of the Climates, making the description of the islands, the seas, and the towns,
reports that the town of Alexandria belongs to the sign of the Lion and undergoes the influence of Mars;
the average duration of the day there is 14 hours, its longitude is 60° 30', which represents (as distance
from the initial point of the longitudes) 4 full hours and 1/5 of an hour.

[PDF p. 447]

Ibn Ouacif Shah, speaking of the accounts that relate to Misraïm ben Beïsar, son of Noah, adds: He taught
them also to make talismans; beasts having come out of the sea that devastated their fields, their gardens,
and their habitations, one made against them talismans, and these beasts disappeared never to return again.
One constructed, elsewhere than on the river, towns among which Raqoudah, on the site of Alexandria; in the
middle of Raqoudah was raised, on columns of gilded copper, a cupola gilded likewise and surmounted by a
mirror made of diverse mixed substances; the diameter of this mirror was five spans, and the cupola was a
hundred cubits high; and if among the peoples who surrounded Egypt and of whom some bore it envy, there was
found someone who wished to attack the Egyptians on the side of the sea, the mirror, by means of some
artifice, set about throwing flames in the direction of the assailants and set them on fire. This mirror
remained standing a long time, but was overturned by the sea. It is claimed that it is in imitation of this
mirror that Alexander constructed his tower, on which was placed also a mirror where one could see the
assailants coming from the country of Roum. But a certain king of this country, using cunning, sent an
emissary who managed to overturn this mirror, which was of composed glass. According to what a Copt recounts,
a survivor of the sacerdotal caste massacred by Eïsad, king of Egypt, took refuge with a king of the country
of the Franks, vaunted to him the numerous treasures of Egypt and its marvels, and inspired in him the
desire to make himself master of the country and to seize its treasures and its talismans, thanks to which
he could obtain all he would desire. Sa ben Marqounos, brother of Eïsad, then king of Egypt, having learned
that the king of the Franks was advancing against him, went to a mountain situated between the sea and the
east of the Nile, had brought there the greatest part of his treasures, and built magazines vaulted and
plated with lead. The king of the Franks appeared with a thousand ships; all that he had met of stelae or
Egyptian edifices, he had overturned, as well as the statues, with the help of the renegade priest. Arrived
at Alexandria, he ravaged the town and the surroundings, destroyed most of the edifices, entered the Nile by
the mouth of Rosetta, and went up as far as Memphis. The people of the different regions he traversed
resisting him, he devastated the country and massacred all that opposed his passage. He arrived thus at the
towns of the interior, desirous of seizing the treasures of the Egyptians; but he found these protected by
powerful talismans, and defended by deep waters, ditches, and barricades. He remained

[PDF p. 448]

there many days without being able to seize them and, irritated against the priest, he killed him. Almost
all his companions had perished, and the Egyptians having gathered killed a great number of those who had
remained in the ships and burned some vessels; in addition, calling on their magical art and their science
of terrors, they raised a tempest that unleashed itself and engulfed most of the ships, so much so that the
king of the Franks alone could escape and flee. The Egyptians returned to their habitations and their
villages, and the king, returned to Memphis, prepared an expedition against the country of Roum, where he
went, ravaging the islands; he became thus formidable to the kings and pursued the priests of whom he
massacred a great number. He reigned 67 years, died at the age of 170 years, and was buried in an
underground passage in the middle of the town of Memphis, and with him, his treasures, precious stones,
statues, talismans, as one had done for his ancestors; among other things, four thousand metsqals of gold
in the forms of terrestrial and marine animals, the image of an eagle in green stone, that of a dragon in
gold, and one engraved on his tomb his name, the victories carried off by him over the kings, and his
campaigns; after him the empire passed to his son Todras.

When Gouriaq, daughter of Toutis, the first Pharaoh of Egypt and Pharaoh of Abraham, mounted on the royal
throne, after having killed her father, she governed her subjects with wisdom and gathered treasures such as
the kings had not yet gathered; she heaped honors on the priests, the scholars, the great magicians, and
raised their rank. She multiplied the temples. Those who refused to obey her took refuge in the town of
Atrib and chose for themselves as king a man of the lineage of Atrib, named Eïdâkhes. One girded him with
the crown and one gathered in a crowd around him. Gouriaq sent to combat him an army that put him to rout
and killed most of his partisans. Eïdâkhes fled into Syria where were the Canaanites; he implored the help
of their king who had prepared for him a numerous army. Gouriaq then opened her magazines, distributed her
treasures, rendered powerful the magicians who did their work. Eïdâkhes advanced with the Canaanite army
commanded by a general named Giroun. As soon as the enemy had entered Egypt, Gouriaq, without the knowledge
of Eïdâkhes, sent to the general her nurse, a woman of the most intelligent, who made known to him that
Gouriaq desired to marry him, that she loved no one of the people of her house, and that if he would kill
E�dâkhes, she would become his wife and would have him proclaimed king of Egypt.

[PDF p. 449]

Giroun, all happy, poured for Eïdâkhes the poison sent by the queen and made him die. But Gouriaq, after the
murder of Eïdâkhes, had it said to Giroun that she could not marry him as long as the Canaanites were in
Egypt and he had not constructed a marvelous town. In that time, the Canaanites had the reputation of being
excellent constructors of edifices and passed for knowing how to execute marvelous things. "Leave the place
where you are," she continued, "and go to the west of my country; repair the numerous ruins that are with
us, raise the constructions, and, on them, edify new ones." Thus did Giroun, and he built, in the desert of
the Occident, a town named Qidoumah where he brought the water of the Nile by means of a canal; the town was
surrounded with numerous plantations and a very high tower was raised there, at the summit of which was
arranged a belvedere plated with gold, silver, glass, and marble. The queen heaped riches on Giroun and
wrote, without his knowledge, to the king his master. When Giroun had finished the construction of the town,
Gouriaq said to him: "Another of our strong towns, which our predecessors possessed, has been, in certain
parts, destroyed; its citadel is overturned; go and work to repair it, after which I will be able to go to
the town you have constructed. And when you have finished repairing the second town, send me your army so
that I may go to you and remove myself from my town and the people of my house; for my desire is that you
enter with me who am their close relative." And Giroun went and constructed the second Alexandria.

The historians recount that the one who had come to attack Gouriaq was Oualid ben Douma' the Amalecite and
the second Pharaoh; here is what would have been the cause of this aggression: El Oualid being ill, sent
into all countries messengers charged with bringing him back water from these regions, so that he might
recognize which could cure him; he had sent into Egypt a young man who was marveled at all the goods he met
there; having drunk of the water of the country, he found it delicious, and returned to his master, he
informed him of the situation of Egypt. El Oualid went there with a numerous army; the secretary of the
kingdom wrote to the queen to ask her for her hand; the queen answered him and agreed with him that he would
build her a town where her force and her power would be recognized, a town that would become the dower of
the queen. He accepted and, traversing the country, went to the west of Egypt; the queen sent him all sorts
of odorous flowers and fruits and furnished him mounts. He went to Alexandria, ruined since the departure of
the Adites, removed

[PDF p. 450]

all the stones, the constructions, and the columns that were there, and laid the foundations of a
magnificent town; he employed to build it a hundred thousand workers who worked a very long time, and he
spent on it all he possessed of riches. Now, each time he had constructed some part of an edifice, there
came out of the sea an animal that destroyed the work of the day before, and the next day one found no more
trace of it, which worried the constructor. Gouriaq had sent him a thousand milk-goats, whose milk he
employed for his kitchen; this flock was accompanied by a shepherd who led it to graze in this place (on the
shore of the sea); each evening, at the moment of withdrawing, the shepherd saw come out of the sea a
magnificent woman whom in his heart he desired; this woman spoke to him and agreed with him that they would
wrestle together, and that if he was victorious, she would belong to him, but that if on the contrary she
carried off the victory, she would take two of his goats. Each evening, the woman was victorious and led
away two of the beasts of the flock; this lasted until she had taken more than half of the goats; as for the
rest, they only wasted away, the shepherd being too much in love to take care of them. One day, his master
passing near him inquired of his state, and he, dreading his severity, recounted to him his adventure. The
king, then taking the garments and the functions of the shepherd for a whole day, saw, toward evening, the
woman come to him and renew the pact; he accepted, wrestled with her, carried off the victory, and treated
her roughly. "Would to God," she cried, "that my vanquisher might return me to my first companion, for he
was good to me and I made him suffer long." He therefore returned her to the shepherd to whom he said:
"Question her on the subject of these constructions which, scarcely raised, are overturned in the night. Ask
her who does this and if there is some means of remedying it." The shepherd questioned the woman who said to
him: "It is the marine animals who overturn your constructions." "What ruse is it fitting to employ?" asked
the shepherd. "Here," she resumed: "you will make coffers in thick glass with lids and will have enter there
skillful draughtsmen, provided with sheets of metal and styluses as well as all they may need for several
days; then, one will transport the boxes, by means of boats, after having attached them with ropes; and
when the boxes are descended into the midst of the waters, let the draughtsmen draw all that will pass near
them; after which, the coffers will be raised and one will execute statues conforming to the drawings,
either in copper, or in stone, or in lead, and one will raise

[PDF p. 451]

them on the side of the sea, in front of the constructions. The animals, in coming out of the water, will
see these images and will flee never to return." The shepherd instructed of all this his master who had the
orders of the woman executed, and he could thus finish his constructions and build the town.

It is claimed that the man of the constructions and the flock was Giroun who had attacked the Egyptians
before El Oualid, and that El Oualid came only after the reign of Gouriaq, vanquished the Egyptians, and
seized Egypt.

It is recounted that Giroun spent on the construction of the town all his riches without being able to
finish it and that he ordered the shepherd to speak of it to the woman. "In the ruins of the town," she
said, "is a circus surrounded by seven columns surmounted by statues of copper standing; immolate to each of
these statues a fat bull and anoint the column that supports it with the blood of this bull; perfume also
the statue by burning the hairs of the tail of the bull and some particles of its horns and its hooves,
saying: 'These offerings are for you, give me what you possess.' Then measure from each column and in the
direction of the face of the statue a distance of a hundred cubits, and at the moment when the full moon
will coincide with the rising of Saturn, make a hole. After having descended fifty cubits, you will find an
enormous slab; rub it with the gall of the bull and lift it. You will descend to an underground passage
fifty cubits long at the end of which is a magazine closed with a lock; the key of the lock is under the
threshold of the door; take it, rub the door with the rest of the gall and the blood of the bull and burn
pieces of its horn and its hoof and some hairs of the tail, then enter. You will find yourself in the
presence of a statue bearing at the neck a tablet of copper on which is written the list of what the
magazine contains. Take what you will, but touch none of the cadavers you may see nor anything of what it
will have on it. Do the same for each column and for each statue. Each of them will procure you a similar
magazine. These are seven naos (tombs) of kings and their treasures." Provided with these instructions, the
king went with the shepherd to put them into execution, and he found things that it is impossible to
describe and innumerable marvels. Thus he finished the construction of the town. The news of it reached
Gouriaq who worried and wished to frighten him and make him perish by ruse. It is reported that among the
objects thus discovered was a sealed roll enclosing a flask of emeralds that contained a green powder and a
red stick. Whoever

[PDF p. 452]

rubbed the eyelids with this powder by means of the stick -- his hair, were it white with old age, became
black again, and his gaze acquired a penetration such that he could perceive the spirits. He found also a
statue of gold that made the sky cover itself with clouds and the rain fall, and images of crows in stone
that answered when one posed them questions. In each magazine he found ten marvelous objects.

When the construction was finished, he sent to ask Gouriaq to come to him. The queen had a rich carpet
carried to him to hang the room where he sat, saying: "Divide your army into three parts; send me the first
third, and, when I will have done a third of the road, send me the second; finally when I will have
traversed half the road, send me the last third; thus your troops will find themselves behind me and no one
will see me when I enter your home. Keep with you only the pages who habitually serve you; for me, I will
come only with the women indispensable to your service, and you will not have to blush before them." Thus
was it done; Gouriaq gathered her escort and her baggage and set out. Forewarned of her departure, Giroun
sent before her the third of his army; the queen had prepared for these troops poisoned foods and drinks and
had them served by her slaves and the members of her family who presented to them the dishes and the
refreshments, perfumes, and all sorts of delicious things. None of the soldiers of Giroun awoke alive in the
morning, and the queen continued her march. The second third of the army having come to meet her, she made
it undergo the same fate and informed Giroun that she had sent his army to his palace and his capital to
keep them for him. Then she set out again and arrived at his place with her nurse and her serving-women. The
nurse blew on the face of Giroun a breath that stupefied him, and she sprinkled him with a liquid she
carried with her. The members of Giroun set about trembling and he said: "Whoever believes he can prevail
over women lies to himself, for the women prevail over him." The queen opened his veins saying: "The blood
of kings is a remedy." She cut off his head, carried it off, and planted it at the summit of his palace; she
seized all his riches, sent them to the town of Memphis, and built at Alexandria a tower on which she
engraved her own name and that of her victim, and the account and the date of her exploit. When the kings
had learned what Gouriaq had done, they dreaded her, submitted to her, and sent her presents. She did in
Egypt numerous marvels and

[PDF p. 453]

constructed on the frontier of the kingdom, on the side of Nubia, a fortress and a bridge under which flowed
the water of the Nile; then, having fallen ill, she remitted the power to her cousin Zelfa, daughter of
Mamoun, and died.

Ibn Khordadabah says: It is recounted that Alexandria was built in 300 years and that, for 70 years, its
inhabitants had, to promenade there, to use black veils in order to protect their eyes against the dazzling
whiteness of the walls of the town and of the marvelous lighthouse raised in the middle of the sea on a crab
of glass. Alexandria counted, besides its ordinary inhabitants, 600,000 Jews mixed with the population.

According to Ibn Ouacif Shah, the cultivations extended, through the desert of Rosetta and Alexandria, to
Barqah; up to there the foot trod the land of Egypt; one had no need of provisions, so abundant were the
fruits and other good things; and one walked constantly sheltered by the shade of the trees against the
ardor of the sun. The king Sa, son of Qobtim, raised in this desert palaces, made there great plantations,
and brought there from the Nile canals that, starting from the western bank of the river, went to the western
frontier of the country, across uninterrupted cultivations. And when the population had disappeared, its
traces remained in this desert; the palaces are destroyed, the inhabitants are dispersed, but one does not
cease to recount, on this region and on what one has seen there of ruins and marvels, surprising legends.

Ibn Abd el Hakem recounts that the one who built Alexandria and laid the foundations of it was Dhu'l Qorneïn
the Greek, whose name is Alexander, and who gave his name to Alexandria; it is he who first made stuffs with
threads of gold, and his father was the first Caesar; it is said that the first constructor was a man of
Egypt, named Mourzebah son of Mourzeba, the Greek, of the lineage of Younan, son of Japhet son of Noah;
according to others, he was of Libya, one of the western districts of Egypt. Ibn Lahi'at says that the
population of this country was Greek; as for (Alexander), he claims that he is Himyarite. Ibn Tobba' said:

[verses:] My grandfather Dhu'l Qorneïn was Muslim and king, before whom the kings bowed in the assemblies;
he reached the West and the East, seeking to obtain the science of a philosopher with a wise mind; he saw
the sun set at the point where it sets, there, where is a source without rain and filled with a fetid mud.

[PDF p. 454]

In another reading, it is said: "Dhu'l Qorneïn was before me a Muslim."

Othman ben Saleh told me: Abd Allah ben Ouaheb, who had it from Abd el Rahman ben Ziad ben An'am, who had it
himself from Sa'd ben Mesa'oud El Tagibi, who had it from two old men of his tribe, recounted to me what
follows: We were at Alexandria and, finding the time long, we said: "What if we went to find 'Aqabah ben
'Amer and conversed with him!" We went therefore to his home and found him seated in his house and informed
him that we had found our day too long. "I too," he said, "finding the time too long, went out (and came
back)." Then, advancing toward us, he added: "I was on duty with the apostle of God. And behold, there
arrived people who believe in the Book (Jews or Christians) bringing with them leaves or books and who said
to me: 'We ask permission to present ourselves before the apostle of God.' I went to the prophet and
informed him of what was happening. 'What is there between them and me?' he said; 'they come to question me
on what I cannot understand. I am only a servant and know only what my lord has taught me.' Then he added:
'Bring me the water of the ablutions.' And having purified himself, he went to the oratory of his house,
prostrated himself twice, and came back, joy and satisfaction painted on his face. He came back therefore
and said to me: 'Have them enter, as well as all those of my companions you will find at the door.' I
introduced them, and when they were in the presence of the apostle of God, the latter said to them: 'If you
desire it, I will set forth to you that on which you wish to question me before you speak; or, if you prefer
it, speak first and set forth yourselves your affair.' 'Certainly,' they answered, 'set it forth to us before
we speak.' 'You desire,' resumed the prophet, 'to question me on Dhu'l Qorneïn, and I am going to tell you
what is written in your books on his subject: First he was a young boy of the country of Roum who obtained
the royalty. Then he undertook an expedition, arrived at the shore of the sea of Egypt, founded there a town
that took the name of Alexandria; when its construction was finished, an angel came who took him and lifted
him little by little into the air to a very great height. Dhu'l Qorneïn, a first time, raised his eyes, and
the angel said to him: "Look below you." "I see," said Dhu'l Qorneïn, "my town and other towns with it." The
angel rose still and said: "Look." "I see my town all alone and see no other." "What you see thus," said the
angel, "is all the earth,

[PDF p. 455]

and what surrounds the earth is the sea. Your Lord has wished to show you the earth and he has given you a
power that, later, will be a teaching for the ignorant and a proof for the sages." Then Dhu'l Qorneïn went to
the place where the sun sets, then to the place where the sun rises; finally he arrived at the double barrier
formed by two very soft mountains on which everything slides, and there he constructed the barrier; then
passing beyond Yagog and Magog (Gog and Magog), he met a people whose face was similar to a face of a dog and
who made war on Yagog and Magog; passing further, he found a dwarf people who made war on the dog-faced
people, then a people of cranes who made war on the people of the dwarfs; then, continuing his route, he met
a people of serpents each of which could swallow an enormous rock. Finally he arrived at the sea that
envelops the earth.' And the visitors of the prophet said to him: 'We certify that such is his history and
that it is thus recounted in our books.'"

According to Khaled ben Ma'dan El Kala'i, the prophet of God, questioned on Dhu'l Qorneïn, answered: "He
governed the surface of the earth from the depth of the soil." The same Khaled reports that 'Omar ben El
Khattab, hearing a man cry: "O Dhu'l Qorneïn!" said: "O my God, pardon! Do the prophets no longer suffice you
that you invoke the angels?"

Qotada affirms, on the authority of El Hassan, that Dhu'l Qorneïn was a king and a pious man, to whom the
name of Dhu'l Qorneïn would have been given for this reason: Aly, questioned on the subject of this personage,
answered that it was neither an angel nor a prophet, but a pious servant loving God, loved by God, sincere
toward God and toward whom God was sincere. The Lord sent him to his people who struck him on his two horns.
He died and was surnamed Dhu'l Qorneïn (the two-horned). It is said on the other hand that this surname was
given to him because he had reached the two horns (extreme points) of the sun, the setting and the rising;
according to others, because he had two tresses of hair that he rolled up, or two little horns that he
concealed under the turban.

According to Ibn Shehab, he was called Dhu'l Qorneïn because he reached the horn of the sun in the Occident
and the horn of the sun in the Orient.

According to Abd Allah ben 'Amr ben El 'As, as soon as Alexandria was built, Pharaoh began by installing
there workshops and habitations; these were the first traces of civilization and construction that appeared
there;

[PDF p. 456]

since then, the constructions have constantly continued there and the workshops have not ceased to function
there. After this Pharaoh, the kings of Egypt changed the state of the town, and Daluka bent Zaba raised the
tower of Alexandria and the lighthouse of Bouqir. When Soliman, son of David, appeared on the earth, he built
there a habitation and a place of prayers. Then Dhu'l Qorneïn having made himself master of it destroyed all
the edifices that the kings, the Pharaohs, and the other personages had raised there, except those that
Soliman had constructed; these, he respected without changing anything in them, contenting himself with
repairing what was in bad state. It is thus that he repaired the lighthouse and raised in Alexandria
edifices that resembled one another from the first to the last. After Alexander, the kings succeeded one
another, Greeks and others, and none of them forgot to construct at Alexandria some monument known today by
the name of the king who constructed it and to whom it is attributed.

Ibn Lahi'ah says: I have been told that one found at Alexandria a stone bearing this inscription: "I am
Sheddad ben 'Ad, who raised the columns, dug the quarries, and, with my arm, barred the rivers. I did not
believe, in accomplishing these works, in either old age or death, and the stone was soft like the silt." In
another account one reads: "I have buried in the sea a treasure of more than twelve cubits and no one will be
able to bring it out, except the people of Mohammed." Ibn Lahi'ah says that the word [used] is the equivalent
of the word for grottoes, caverns. Abou 'Aly El Qali, in the Kitab El Amali, says: Ibn El A'râbi and others
have recited these verses:

[verses:] You ask me the number of my years, and I have said: "If I had lived the age of the lizard, or the
age of Noah since the Flood, if I had been able to come to understand the voiceless insects, if I had lived
all the duration of the time that followed the Flood, certainly I would have been already the lot of old age
or of death."

And in another reading:

[verses:] Soliman learned the language of the ant, in the time when the rock was like mud.

Another said: "In the time that followed the Flood, the solid was soft."

[PDF p. 457]

For them, the time of the [jadid/post-flood era] is the period that followed the Flood, a period during
which the fertility was marvelous and the prosperity admirable. Someone said: "the time of [that era] is a
time that has not had its like. As for the words [voiceless creatures], one calls [voiceless] those of the
animals whose voice one does not hear." These verses are of Roubat ben El 'Agag ben Roubah ben Labid ben
Sakhr ben Kathif ben Heï ben Bekr ben Zabi'at ben Sa'd ben Malek ben Zeïd manah ben Tamim. Here is on what
occasion he made them: Having led camels to drink at a source belonging to the tribe of 'Aql, he saw a young
girl who pleased him; he asked her for her hand in pledge of betrothal. "I see years," she said; "do you
possess also some property?" "Yes," he answered, "a flock of beasts." "Is there also money?" asked the young
girl. "No," said Roubah. "O people of 'Aql!" she cried; "you have so much pretension and you are poor!" And
Roubah said then:

[verses:] In despising my situation and making light of my flock, she showed her discontent and humiliated,
among the people of 'Akl, my position, and made of the head a sign as if to prove it to me. You ask me the
number of my years, and I say that if I had lived the age of the lizard or that of Noah since the Flood,
when the humid stone was similar to the muddy silt.

And in another reading:

[verses:] If I had come to know the language of the voiceless animals, (as) Soliman knew the language of the
ants.

Abou Bekr ben Darid, who was questioned on the time of [that era], answered: "The Arabs claim that it is the
time when the stones were soft."

One reads in 'Abd el Hakem: It is said that the constructor of Alexandria was Sheddad ben 'Ad, and God is the
most learned.

Alexandria comprised three juxtaposed towns, namely: the lighthouse and its surroundings, Alexandria proper
-- that is, the heart of present Alexandria -- and Nafitah. Each was surrounded by a wall behind which a
second wall rose that completely surrounded each of the three towns. It is said that Alexandria was defended
by seven well-armed fortresses and seven ditches. Alexander clad with marble the walls and the soil of the
town of Alexandria, whose inhabitants wore then black and red garments. Formerly the

[PDF p. 458]

monks dressed in black, because of the dazzling whiteness of the marble, which was so brilliant that it was
not necessary to light torches during the night, and as soon as the moon appeared, one could easily sew and
thread a needle.

It is recounted that Alexandria was built in three hundred years, inhabited for three hundred years, and
for three hundred ruined. What is certain is that for seventy years, no one could penetrate there without
covering the eyes with a black veil, because of the whiteness of the plaster and the slabs, and during this
time one lit no lamps there. The town remained white and brilliant during the night as during the day, and
as soon as the sun was set, no one went out of his house any more; whoever ventured outside his home
disappeared. Among the inhabitants of the town was a shepherd who led his flock to graze on the shore of the
sea, and from the sea came out someone who carried off some beast of his flock; the shepherd having hidden
himself in this place awaited the coming of the ravisher. And he saw a woman who smoothed her hair and who
tried to repel him, but he made himself master of her and dragged her to his house where she lived intimately
with him. Seeing that the inhabitants of the town no longer went out of their homes after sunset, this woman
asked them the reason for it, and they explained to her that those of them who ventured outside were carried
off. She then prepared for them talismans, and it was she who, the first in Egypt, made talismans at
Alexandria. It is recounted that the marble was a veritable inconvenience for the inhabitants; from dawn, it
was brilliant like flour, and this brilliance became more vivid still when noon arrived.

According to El Masa'oudi, some historians recount that when the Macedonian Alexander had regulated the
administration of his States, and had set out to conquer the entire world -- air, earth, and water -- he
arrived at the place where Alexandria is and found there ruins of monuments and numerous columns of marble;
in the middle of the town rose an enormous column bearing the following inscription in musnad characters,
which is the primitive writing of the peoples of Himyar and the kings of 'Ad: "It is I, Sheddad, son of 'Ad
who, with my arm, barred the rivers, cut the gigantic columns, the hills, and the high mountains; I built
Iram Zat El 'Amad which has not its like on the earth. Here I wished to build a town like Iram and transport
there all that my family and my people count of noble and of [...]

[PDF p. 459]

generous, and this without taking account of fear, of old age, of chagrin, or of sickness. But the moment of
the reckoning has come for me and has removed me from my projects; and the arrival of this moment has been
to me the cause of long chagrins and long sorrows. Short has been my dream and my sojourn (on the earth);
yesterday, I had to leave my house, and there is no king, however powerful he be, who does not find himself
subject to this reality; there is no army, whatever its number, that is not subject to the fear from which
one cannot defend oneself either by will or by disdain; there is a term to power; the monuments disappear and
also the sublime and glorious sultan. Whoever will see the monuments I have left, whoever will know my
history, the duration of my life, and the annihilation of my genius, despite the powerful precautions I had
taken, that one will no longer be deceived by the world; for the world is deceiving and perfidious; from it
one must claim only what it gives and take only what one can receive from it. There are long discourses that
demonstrate the inanity of the world, put one on guard against its deceptions, and turn one away from seeking
repose there."

Alexander, pensive, descended musing on these words and taking them for a rule. Then he had the artisans of
all countries gathered, traced the foundations of the town to which he gave some miles of length and width;
he gathered there columns and blocks of alabaster, and had come boats laden with alabaster, marble, and
stones of all sorts, from the island of Sicily and the countries of Greece and Crete and the extremities of
the sea of Roum, there where it joins the Ocean sea. One brought some also from the island of Rhodes. Order
was given to the workers to raise around the terrain where the foundations had been traced a wall that would
enclose the town, and at each point where the earth had been dug one planted a beam, each beam being
connected to its neighbor by a cord stretched from one to the other; the whole was joined to a column of
marble placed facing his tent. To this column was suspended a big sonorous bell, and everyone -- masons,
workers, and artisans -- were warned that as soon as they heard the sound of this bell and saw the cords
agitate (the support-posts all bearing a smaller bell), they were to lay the foundations of the town at the
same time on all sides. Alexander desired that this operation be executed at a moment chosen by him and at a
favorable rising (of the stars). But Alexander inclined little by little the head and was taken by a light
sleep while he watched for the propitious instant, and a crow,

[PDF p. 460]

settling on the cord that supported the big bell suspended from the column, set this bell in movement. The
bell rang, the cords agitated, and the little bells they supported tinkled, for all this was done by
movements ingeniously combined and scientifically prepared. The workers, seeing the cords agitate and
hearing the little bells ring, laid all together the foundations uttering cries of praise and purification.
Alexander, awakened, asked what was happening; in learning it, he was marveled and said: "I wished one thing
and God wished another, and what God does not wish to accord, he refuses it. I wished that the duration of
this town be long, and God wished that its disappearance and its ruin be rapid and that the kings change its
fortune." Alexander, having therefore regulated the construction of the town and fixed its foundations, the
animals of the sea came out of the waters as soon as the night had come, and rushed on the constructions
already made. Seeing this the next day, Alexander said: "Behold, already begins the ruin of the constructions
of this town; let its end come according to the will of the Creator!" And he augured ill of the damage
accomplished by the beasts of the sea; yet the construction continued; each day one constructed, one made
plans, and overseers had been posted to repel the animals at their coming out of the sea. But when one came
back in the morning, one ascertained that the animals had come and destroyed the constructions. Alexander,
very worried, was terrified by this danger come from the sea; he reflected therefore and examined what it
was fitting to do and what ruse he should employ to set aside this calamity and remove this misfortune from
the city. And while he was alone, reflecting on all this, the sought ruse presented itself to his mind at the
same time as the means of putting it into execution. In the morning, he had the workers come and ordered
them to fabricate for him a box of wood, ten cubits long and five wide; one arranged there windows of glass,
surrounded by the wood of the box in all their circumference, and maintained by pitch, mastic, and other
resinous and impermeable matters, to prevent the water from entering the box. One reserved there also
emplacements for the cords. Into this box entered Alexander, and with him the people of his bureau who knew
how to paint, and the doors were closed again on him, after he had given the order to caulk (the joints)
with the matters of which we have spoken; then, two big ships conducted the box into the open sea, and there,
after having suspended under the box weights of lead and

[PDF p. 461]

of iron and stones, in order to draw it into the depths, the box was placed between the two boats which one
joined by beams, in order to avoid any separation; the cords that held the box were moored on the two ships,
then paid out. The box plunged and reached the bottom of the sea, and those who were inside saw demons of
human form, but some of which had heads of animals; some were armed with axes, others with saws or picks, in
imitation of the workers and artisans of the town provided with their construction tools. Alexander and his
companions examined attentively these figures and drew them on paper, interpreting them according to their
different species and reproducing the ugliness of their forms and their bodies. Then the cord was agitated,
and, warned by this signal, the men who had remained in the boats hauled on the moorings and brought the box
to the surface. Alexander came out of it and prescribed to the workers who worked the iron, the copper, and
the stone to execute the images of the animals such as they had been drawn; this done, the statues were
raised on columns on the shore of the sea, and the construction was resumed. The night having come, the
destructive animals came out, but, seeing their images placed on columns and turned toward the sea, they
left and reappeared no more. Alexandria could thus be built; one covered its walls with a coating of plaster,
and on the gate of the town Alexander had this inscription engraved: "It is here, Alexandria, that I wished
to build for salvation, success, happiness, felicity, joy, and the duration of the centuries; but the
Creator, the king of the heavens and the earth, the annihilator of peoples, did not wish that it last thus.
I founded it and regulated its construction; I covered with plaster its wall, and God gave me every thing,
science and wisdom, and he smoothed for me the difficulties. All that I desired of science, he accorded it
to me; he prevented nothing of what I wished to undertake. To God returns the complaisance, to me the work;
perfection is the lot of those of my contemporaries who served him. Glory to God, the master of men; there
is no God but he, he is the Lord of all things." Following this inscription he had represented all that was
to occur after him, in his country, of calamities, of prosperity, and of ruin, and all that was to happen to
Alexandria until the end of the world.

The construction of Alexandria reposed on vaults forming arcaded bridges on which rose the houses of the
town and under which

[PDF p. 462]

cavaliers armed with lances passed at ease and thus made the circuit of the town under the vaults placed
below. One had arranged in these underground passages openings and dormers for the light and conduits for
the air. During the night, Alexandria remained lit, without one lighting lamps, thanks to the whiteness of
the alabaster and the marble; its markets, its streets, its avenues were protected by vaulted roofs, in such
a way that the inhabitants did not have to preoccupy themselves with the rain. The town was surrounded by
seven walls constructed in stones of diverse colors and separated by ditches dug at a certain distance from
the walls. In addition, the town was hung with hangings of green silk to protect the eyes of the inhabitants
against the brilliance of the marble, whose whiteness was dazzling. The town once constructed and peopled,
there occurred calamities of which one finds the account among the writers who have occupied themselves with
the history of Egypt and Alexandria: each night, inhabitants were carried off, and the next day a good number
of them had disappeared. Having learned it, Alexander had talismans placed on columns named obelisks and
which have remained standing until the present. Each of these columns had the form of a cypress and was
eighty cubits high; it reposed on a socle of copper. Under each of them one had deposited figures, images,
and an inscription.

Of all the histories that precede, says the author (Maqrizi), those of Ibn Ouacif Shah are evidently
authentic; as for what El Maça'oudi reports, claiming that it was Alexander who made the box that served to
draw the animals of the sea, that is imaginary. For Ibn Ouacif Shah is very instructed in the Chronicles of
the Egyptians. Likewise what El Maça'oudi says, relative to the obelisks raised by Alexander, is pure
imagination. These obelisks are simply the lighthouses that lit the town and the signals raised by the
ancient kings of Egypt. They are works of the first kings of the Copts and the Pharaohs who reigned in Egypt
in the ancient times.

[PDF p. 463]

CHAPTER V
OF ALEXANDER

It is Alexander, son of Philip, son of Amintah or Amyntas, son of Heraklesh or Hercules, the formidable, who
was himself son of Alexander the Great; the king Philip governed for his father the country of Magedoniah or
Makedoniah for twenty-five years, made show there of all sorts of ruses, and imagined all the possible
wickednesses, surpassing in this by far all those who had reigned before him in the country.

At the beginning of his life, his brother Alexander had delivered him as hostage to a chief of the country
of Roum with whom he remained three years. The chief of Roum was a philosopher and the young prince learned
philosophy with him; after the murder of his brother Alexander, the people chose to succeed him Philip who
was proclaimed chief; he was a remarkable king, made war on the Greeks, vanquished them, traversed the
deserts, killed there thousands of people, and took towns. He gathered around him an innumerable crowd and an
extraordinary army, lowered the Greeks, lost an eye in a battle, invaded the country, ravaged, pillaged,
sacked, then, gathering all the inhabitants of the country of Roum, he formed of them an army of a hundred
thousand infantry and fifty thousand cavalry, without counting those who constituted his national army,
composed of Macedonians or people of other countries, and marched to the conquest of Persia.

While he gathered his troops, he occupied himself with the marriage of his daughter Cleopatra whom he wished
to unite to the father of his wife, the uncle of his son Alexander; two days before the marriage, he was
seated conversing with his generals, when one of them asked him what kind of death seemed to him preferable
for a man. "That," he said, "which is necessary for the strong, valiant, and proven man," wishing to say
that, for himself, he did not desire to die otherwise than by the sword. And, during the night, the sickness
surprised him, his strength abandoned him, subdued by the pain, and he hastened the accomplishment of the
marriage; he attended the feasts, mounted on his chariot between his son Alexander and Alexander his
relative; but, having withdrawn a moment apart, a young Greek pierced him with a lance-blow and killed him,
avenging thus his father. Alexander therefore took the government of the kingdom after his father Philip,
and

[PDF p. 464]

began by undertaking an expedition against the country of Roum which had shaken off the yoke of Macedonia to
submit to the domination of the Persians. He made the trace of it disappear, exterminated the inhabitants,
destroyed the towns, reduced to slavery or sold the population; all the country, down to the smallest
villages, had to pay him tribute. After that, he made perish all the members of his family and most of his
relatives, while preparing his expedition against Persia. His army comprised twenty-two thousand cavalry and
sixty thousand infantry, his fleet counted five hundred eighty ships. It is with forces so minimal that he
made the greatest kings of the earth tremble, that he reached Alexandria and entered Jerusalem where he
offered sacrifices to God. He left Jerusalem to make war on Dara (Darius). The army of Dara, king of Persia,
at his first encounter with Alexander, was of six hundred thousand combatants. It was vanquished by
Alexander, and this defeat was for the Persians a frightful catastrophe and an abominable misfortune; there
was killed an extraordinary number of them, and Alexander for his part killed a hundred twenty cavaliers and
ninety infantry.

Alexander continued his route, taking the towns and pillaging what they enclosed, when he learned that Dara,
after new preparations, was marching to meet him with considerable forces. Fearing to be rejoined by him in a
defile, between two mountains, where he was then, he operated a forced march of nearly a hundred miles, with
a prodigious rapidity, and reached the town of Tarsus; during the road, he had nearly died of the excess of
the cold which had contracted his nerves. Dara advanced with three hundred thousand infantry and a hundred
thousand cavalry, and, when the two armies were in presence, Alexander, terrified by the immense number of
the enemies and the insignificant force of his own army, was on the point of taking flight. But the combat
was engaged, the generals paid with their persons, the brave descended into the melee, the lance-blows and
the (sword-)blows were exchanged, and the plain became too narrow for the crowd (that filled it). The two
kings, Dara and Alexander, fought body to body. Alexander was the most accomplished cavalier, the bravest and
most vigorous of his time; and the two kings fought until they were both covered with wounds and Dara took
flight. Then the carnage of the Persians began; one killed nearly eighty thousand infantry and nearly ten
thousand cavalry; about forty thousand men were made prisoners; the army of Alexander had hardly lost more
than two

[PDF p. 465]

hundred infantry and a hundred fifty cavalry. The camp of the Persians fell to the power of Alexander who
gathered there incalculable quantities of gold, silver, and precious furniture. Among the prisoners were the
mother, the wife, the sister, and the two daughters of Dara. The latter asked Alexander to return them to him
for the half of his empire, but the Macedonian refused. Dara therefore made for the third time his
preparations and gathered the Persians to the last man, composing thus an army of all those who, among his
peoples, were in state to bear arms. Alexander sent one of his generals who, with a fleet, descended to the
country of Porus, and marched himself on Syria where the kings of the world came to make him their
submission. To some he accorded pardon, he banished others and made perish the rest, then advanced against
the fortress of Tarsus; Tarsus was an ancient and superb town and the inhabitants had known how to capture
the confidence of the Africans who, thanks to the alliance they had contracted, trafficked with them.
Alexander blocked them so closely that they ended by opening their gates; from there, the conqueror passed
to Rhodes, then into Egypt, ravaging everything on his passage. In Egypt, he founded Alexandria; Orosius
speaks of this foundation and enters, on this subject, into interminable accounts and considerations that we
renounce citing, for they would lengthen too much our book.

Dara having finished repairing (his disasters), set out with four hundred thousand infantry and a hundred
thousand cavalry, and met Alexander, returning from Egypt, in the surroundings of Tarsus. The battle was
gigantic and the Greeks, prepared and accustomed to victory and to death, fought with fury; on the part of
the Persians, the fury was no less, excited as they were to the carnage and preferring death to servitude
and slavery. All that has been able to be said of a melee is nothing in comparison with the slaughter that
signaled this one. Finally Dara, seeing his army vanquished and in rout, thought of forestalling death in
this encounter and of avoiding captivity by paying with his person and seeking to get himself killed in the
battle. One of his generals, taken with pity for him, tried to console him; Dara took flight in his turn:
the army and the power of the Persians were in full rout, and behind it fled also the king. All the regions
of the Orient were subjugated to the country of Roum and the Persian kings disappeared for 450 years.
Alexander occupied himself with examining and classing all that was found in the camp of the Persians; the
division among the Greek troops lasted thirty days, after which the conqueror

[PDF p. 466]

marched on the principal town of Persia which was also the capital of all the kingdom and where were
gathered the riches and the treasures of the world; he destroyed it and gave it over to pillage. Having
learned that Dara was captive and loaded with chains of silver at the home of one of his subjects, Alexander
made his preparations and set out with six thousand men; on his road, he met Dara, pierced with numerous
wounds of which he soon died; the Macedonian made of him great mourning, pronounced the funeral discourses,
and had him buried in the tomb of the kings of Persia. The three combats of which one has just spoken are an
example for whoever likes to regulate himself according to examples, an advice for whoever likes advice; one
saw fight, in these three encounters, nearly fifteen million men of a single empire, cavaliers and infantry
of Asia -- that is, of Iraq. Sixty years before, nearly nineteen million men of this empire had been killed,
and in addition a million representing the cavaliers and infantry of Iraq, of Syria, of Tarsus, of Egypt, of
the island of Rhodes, and of all the countries that Alexander subjugated. He reigned over the world, and the
world that he had made tremble by the extraordinary misfortunes he had brought it was divided among his
generals. And the inhabitants of the earth were either annihilated by a frightful death, or, overexcited by
the passion of murder, made themselves the accomplices of these horrible massacres. At the moment of dying,
Alexander wished that each of his generals be, after his death, surnamed Ptolemy, in order to terrify the
enemies, for the word Ptolemy signifies "the warrior." Such is the truth on the history of Alexander; as for
what strays from it, one must take no account of it.

It is said that Alexander had red hair and blue eyes; he was the first man who kept vigil during the night.
He had buffoons who made him laugh and storytellers who told him extraordinary stories, wishing by this means
to keep his empire over himself and master his soul, and not for jest. It is from him that the kings took the
habit of keeping vigil and of having buffoons and storytellers.

[PDF p. 467]

CHAPTER VI
OF THE ERA OF ALEXANDER

Abou-l Rihan Mohammed Ahmed El Birouni says: The era of the Greek Alexander, whom some confuse with Dhu'l
Qorneïn, governs the years of the Persians and it is of it also that the major part of the peoples make use.
It begins at the epoch when Alexander, at the age of twenty-six years, set out from Greece to go to combat
Dara, king of the Persians.

On arriving at Jerusalem, he prescribed to the Jews to abandon the era of David and of Moses to adopt his;
the Jews conformed to his orders, adopted his era, and made use of it for their needs, making it start from
the twenty-sixth year of the conqueror -- that is, exactly a thousand years after Moses; they have remained
faithful to this computation and still employ it. It is also according to the era of Alexander that counted
the Greeks who previously had taken, as initial date of their calculations, the epoch when Younan, son of
Nourés, left Babel for the Occident.

The Alexandrine era begins the Monday 1st of Teschrin I, corresponding to the fourth day of Baba; the day
begins at sunrise, going until the setting of this star and ending the next day at sunrise; the day completes
itself thus with the following night. The beginnings of the months return at uniform intervals, following a
series that repeats itself constantly. The number of the months of this year is twelve; they differ one from
another by the number of the days that compose them. Here are the names of the twelve months and the number
of days of each of them: Teshrin I, 31 days; Teshrin II, 30 days; Kanoun I, 31 days; Kanoun II, 31 days;
Shabbath, 28 days 1/4; Adhar, 31 days; Nisan, 30 days; Aïar, 31 days; Haziran, 30 days; Tammouz, 31 days; Ab,
31 days; Eïloul, 30 days; therefore, seven months have 31 days, four months have 30, and a single one has 28
1/4; this is why they give Shabbath 28 days for three consecutive years and, the fourth year, 29 days. Thus
the year is composed of 365 days 1/4, and each fourth year comprises 366 days; one gives it the name of
intercalary year. In adding this quarter of a day to the year, one wished to draw near the number of the days
of the solar year, in such a way that affairs execute themselves following an invariable series and that the

[PDF p. 468]

months of cold or heat, the season of sowing, of the pruning of the trees, or of the harvest of the fruits
return at a determined epoch of the year, without any change. The first intercalary year was the third year
of the era of Alexander, and between the Monday, first day of the Alexandrine era, and the Thursday first day
of the month of Moharram when our prophet Mohammed ben 'Abd Allah ben 'Abd El Motaleb, the apostle of God,
fled from Mecca to Medina, there have elapsed 933 years and 155 days. Between this same day (beginning of the
era of Alexander) and the Friday, first day after the Flood, one counts 1792 years and 193 days. From the
beginning of the reign of Bokta Nasar (Nebuchadnezzar) to the first day of the era of Alexander there have
elapsed 435 solar years and 238 days.

Abou Bekr Ahmed ben 'Aly ben Qeïs ben Ouahshiah, in his book of the Nabataean Agriculture, reports that,
according to the accounts of the Copts, who would have found this in their books, the month of Tammouz owes
its name to a man whose history is long and marvelous. This man had invited the king to adore the seven
planets and the twelve signs of the Zodiac; the king had him put to death, but Tammouz, after having been
killed, lived anew; the king made him perish again several times by means of frightful tortures, but, after
each murder, Tammouz always revived: finally he died. All these months take their name from a virtuous and
learned man who lived formerly among the Nabataeans, in the time when they inhabited the region of Babel,
before the Chaldeans; for this Tammouz is neither a Chaldean, nor a Canaanite, nor a Hebrew, nor a Djermaq;
he is one of the ancient Hazanasis; this is why they say that each of their months bears the name of a man of
the times past; that Teshrin I and Teshrin II were two brothers skilled in the sciences; likewise for Kanoun
I and Kanoun II; as for Shabbath, it is the name of a man who lay with a thousand virgin women without
procreating or engendering anything, so they have placed him at the end of the series of the months, because
of his impotence to engender, and, for this same reason, they have diminished the number of his days. Today,
all the Sabeans, or Babylonians, or Hazanasis lament and weep over Tammouz, during the month that bears this
name; they have a feast consecrated to Tammouz; and to this month they have given a greater number of days
and have consecrated it to the women. There all the women afflict themselves, lament, and weep over Tammouz
and conduct a long mourning. And they know of him nothing more than what they recount thus: "We have found
that our ancestors [...]

[PDF p. 469]

lamented over Tammouz in the feast consecrated to Tammouz." The Christians claim that they do the same thing
for a man named Georgis (George), one of the disciples of Jesus, who invited a certain king to embrace the
Christian religion, and the king punished him by these successive murders. If I am not mistaken, the history
of Tammouz reached the Christians who changed his name to that of Georgis and took, in the succession of
time, the place of the Sabeans; for the Sabeans made the commemoration of Tammouz the first day of the month
of Tammouz, and the Christians celebrate Georgis at the end of Nisan. It is said that a king of Rome added to
the months of the peoples of Roum the months of Kanoun II and of Shabbath; until then they had only ten
months, each of which counted thirty-six days.

It is recounted that Fioufious, first king of the town of Rome and who reigned forty-three years, added
Kanoun II and Shabbath to the months of the peoples of Roum who until then possessed only ten, each counting
thirty-six days. The reason for which Shabbath had two days less than the other months was that there was,
in the time of Fiten, chief of the army of Roum, an incursion following which occurred wars with Fariourious,
wars that ended with the victory of Fiten and the conquest by the latter of the Empire of Roum. Orders were
given on the subject of Fariourious and one made for him this proclamation: "Aya Mordya," which means: "Go
out, O Shabbath," and he was drowned in the sea. And Shabbath was named Feriourious (February) to recall by
that his wickedness. And as this happened in the two last days of the month, the 29th and the 30th of
Shabbath, these two days were cut from this month and transferred to Tammouz and Kanoun II which had each 31
days. Later, came another king who said: It is not fitting that Shabbath be in the middle of the year, and he
put it at the end, and, since that time, the Greeks have not ceased to hold Shabbath apart.

[PDF p. 470]

CHAPTER VII
OF THE DIFFERENCE THAT THERE IS BETWEEN ALEXANDER AND DHU'L QORNEÏN, WHO ARE TWO DISTINCT PERSONAGES

The people who know history hold for certain that Dhu'l Qorneïn is the personage of whom God makes mention in
his sacred Book when he says: "One will question you on Dhu'l Qorneïn; answer: I will tell you something of
him; we gave him for domain the earth and we provided him with all things" (Koran, XVIII, 82, 83). Thus he
has become for the Arabs a subject they have treated frequently in their poetry. His name was El Sa'b ben Dhu
Morathed ben El Hareth El Raïsh ben El Hemâl Dhu Seded ben 'Ad Dhu Menah ben 'Amer El Moultat ben Saksak ben
Ouaïl ben Himyar ben Seba ben Yashgab ben Ya'rab ben Qahtan ben Houd ben 'Aber ben Shaleh ben Arfakhshad ben
Sam ben Nouh; he was a king of the Himyarites -- that is, of the pure Arabs whom one also calls the
full-blooded Arabs. Dhu'l Qorneïn was therefore a Tobba (name of the Himyarite kings) who wore the crown.
When he was named king, he behaved at first proudly, then he humbled himself before God and joined El Khidr.
Those have been mistaken who have wished that Alexander, son of Philip, be the same as Dhu'l Qorneïn who
raised the barrier; the words Dhu 'arabiah and Dhu'l Qorneïn are indeed surnames that the Arabs give to the
kings of the Yemen; Alexander was a Roumi, a Greek. Abou Dza'far El Tabari reports that El Khidr lived in the
time of the king Afridoun, son of El Dahak; it is at least the opinion of the generality of the people who
believe in the Book; the epoch of El Khidr is therefore anterior to the time of Moses, son of Amran; he was,
it is said, a precursor of Dhu'l Qorneïn the Great, contemporary of Abraham. El Khidr traveled with Dhu'l
Qorneïn, reached with him the country where flows the river of life, and drank of its waters without the
knowledge of Dhu'l Qorneïn and his companions. This is why El Khidr lived and still lives, according to what
these historians claim. According to others, Dhu'l Qorneïn would have attended the oath of Abraham and would
be the same as Afridoun son of El Dahak, of whom El Khidr would have been the precursor.

Abou Mohammed 'Abd el Melek ben Heshâm, in his book Of the Crowns treating of the knowledge of the kings of
the times past, after having

[PDF p. 471]

recalled the genealogy of Dhu'l Qorneïn that we have cited, adds: He was a crowned Tobba' who, having
obtained the empire, showed himself at first proud and later humbled himself before God, rejoined El Khidr at
Jerusalem, and went with him to the Occident and the Orient of the earth; all was accorded to him, as God
himself recalls, and he raised the barrier that separates Yagog and Magog. He died in Iraq...

As for Alexander, he is a Greek well known under the name of Alexander the Macedonian. Ibn 'Abbas,
questioned on Dhu'l Qorneïn, answered: "He is a Himyarite, named El Sa'b ben Dhu Morathed, to whom God gave
the earth for domain and whom he heaped with all goods. He reached the two horns of the sun and the extremity
of the earth and constructed the barrier between Yagog and Magog." "And Alexander?" one asked him. "He is,"
he answered, "a pious man of the country of Roum and a skillful man who raised a lighthouse in Africa on the
shore of the sea, made himself master of the town of Rome, reached the sea of the Occident where he
accumulated monuments, palaces, and towns."

One questioned Ka'b el Ahbar on Dhu'l Qorneïn: "In the opinion of our scholars and our ancestors," he said,
"he was Himyarite and was named El Sa'b ben Dhu Morathed; while Alexander was a Greek of the race of Esau,
son of Isaac, son of Abraham; the people from which Alexander came followed the religion of the Messiah, son
of Mary; from this people came Galen and Aristotle."

Here is what El Hamadani says, in the book Of the Genealogies: Kahlan ben Sebas engendered Zeïd; Zeïd
engendered 'Ariba, Malek, Rhalba, and 'Amikareb. (According to El Heïtham, 'Amikareb ben Seba is the brother
of Himyar and of Kahlan) and 'Amikareb engendered Abou Melek Fadrah and Mahilil who are the two sons of
'Amikareb; Rhaleb engendered Genadah ben Rhaleb who reigned after Mahalil ben Amikareb ben Seba; 'Arib
engendered 'Amr; 'Amr engendered Zeïd and El Hamisa surnamed Abou-l Sa'b who is the same as Dhu'l Qorneïn the
Ancient, the traveler and the constructor, on the subject of whom El Na'man ben Bechir said:

[verses:] To whoever before us would boast of belonging to a tribe of generous men, we would answer: Dhu'l
Qorneïn and Hatem are of ours.

El Haretz speaks of him when he says:

[verses:] Name us someone of you, that we may know if he bore the title of king in the time of ignorance,
like the two Tobba' and Dhu'l Qorneïn; for these, that is admitted by the people of a good mind. And it is
what is most true that must be accepted.

[PDF p. 472]

It is also to him that allude these verses of Ibn Abou Dib El Khoza'i:

[verses:] It is from us that came the one who traveled in the two parts of the world and traversed all the
countries above and below; he touched the horn of the sun at the Orient and at the Occident, and, on the
ruins of Yagog, he edified and established a government; that one, it is Dhu'l Qorneïn; Himyar boasts that one
of its kings had an army impossible to contain and to count.

According to El Hamadani, the scholars of Hamadan name Dhu'l Qorneïn El Sa'b ben Malek ben El Harem el a'ia
ben Rabi'ah ben El Gobar ben Malek, and, on the subject of Dhu'l Qorneïn, there are numerous legends. The
Imam Fakhr el Dîn El Razi, in his commentary on the generous Koran, among other traits he lets fly against
those who claim that Alexander is the same as Dhu'l Qorneïn, says: Alexander had had for master Aristotle and
conformed to his prescriptions and abstained from what he forbade him; Aristotle was renowned for his
hardness. As for Dhu'l Qorneïn, he is a prophet. How has one been able to confuse a prophet with a pagan of
this species?

El Gahez, in the book Of the Animals, says that the mother of Dhu'l Qorneïn was a mortal and that his father
was an angel, and it is for this reason that Omar ben El Khattab, hearing a man hail another man saying: "O
Dhu'l Qorneïn!" cried: "Do the names of prophets fail you, that you invoke the angels?" El Moukhtar Ibn Abou
'Obeïd recounts that 'Aly, when he spoke of Dhu'l Qorneïn, always called him "that hairless angel." And God
is the most learned.

[PDF p. 473]

CHAPTER VIII
OF THE KINGS WHO REIGNED AT ALEXANDRIA AFTER ALEXANDER

It is said, in the book of Orosius, that Alexander reigned over the world for twelve years, and, during all
his reign, the world was in his power. At his death, he left it to his generals who marched under his orders,
acting with them like a lion that throws to its cubs the product of its hunt, on which, after the father, the
cubs rush; thus the generals of Alexander divided among themselves the regions; Egypt, all of Africa, and the
Occident fell to the general commanding his cavalry and who reigned in his place, Ptolemy, son of Laoui, or
otherwise, Ptolemy, son of the speaking hare. Orosius speaks also of the rest of the countries divided among
the other generals, from the extremity of the countries of India to the extreme point of the Occident. Then,
he added, there arose between them wars caused by a letter emanating from Alexander, ordering that all the
strangers be sent back to their countries and that they be freed from slavery and servitude. The king of
Roum was very affected by it, for he feared that the strangers and the exiles, once returned to their country
or to their fatherland, would seek to avenge themselves. And this is why they ceased to obey the king of
Macedonia.

According to another author, this Ptolemy ravaged the country of the Benou Mo'add after having seized
Palestine; later, he gave them back their liberty and made them present of vases ornamented with precious
stones that were placed in the Temple of Jerusalem. This prince reigned twenty years, or according to others,
forty years, or even thirty-eight years. One had surnamed him Philadelphus, which means who loves his father
(sic); he was Macedonian, and it is he who subjugated the Jews and led away a great number of them to Egypt.
In his time lived the philosopher Zeno, and he himself was a philosopher. Perdiccas, one of the generals of
Alexander, having advanced against Egypt with a numerous army and considerable forces, dividing thus in two
parts the Empire of Macedonia, Ptolemy marched to meet him, put him to rout, pillaged his camp, killed him,
and seized all he possessed; this Ptolemy made war also on a great number of the generals of Alexander.
Another historian says that this Ptolemy was a wise, prudent, fine, and adroit man; he was the first who,
having made [...]

[PDF p. 474]

[OF THE KINGS WHO REIGNED AT ALEXANDRIA AFTER ALEXANDER, continued]

taken falcons, tamed and trained them. Before, the kings were ignorant of this diversion.

After him, reigned at Alexandria Ptolemy II, surnamed Philodhofos, who was also called "who loves his
brother"; he reigned 38 years. It is he who gave back liberty to the Jews captive in Egypt and who restored
the sacred vases to the prophet 'Azir (Ezra); he chose also among the Jewish scholars the seventy
interpreters charged with translating the Books of the Law and the Prophets, from Hebrew into Greek and into
Latin. He was a philosopher and astronomer.

After him, reigned his son Ptolemy Aurakhitis, surnamed "who loves his father"; he reigned 20 years.

After him, reigned his brother Ptolemy Philopator; his reign lasted 7 years. It is he who had massacred
nearly sixty thousand Jews and who made his yoke heavy upon them. It is said that he was very versed in
astronomy, and that one owes him the book of the Almagest.

After him, reigned his son Ptolemy Asfamish "who loves his mother"; the duration of his reign was 24 years.

After him, reigned his son Ptolemy Philonatrah -- that is, "the artisan"; during his reign, which lasted 35
years, he vanquished the king of Syria and inflicted on the Jews a thousand miseries and a thousand
torments.

After him, reigned at Alexandria his son Ptolemy Abriatish the Alexandrian; he reigned 29 years; in his time,
the Romans seized Spain and burned the town of Carthage; the fire lasted there seventeen days; the town was
entirely destroyed and its foundations so overturned that the marble of its walls was reduced to dust; there
were about 900 years that Carthage had been founded. All the inhabitants were sold as slaves, even the most
noble and the best; the destruction of the town had been ordered by the general of Rome.

After him, reigned his son Ptolemy Soter surnamed "the Iron"; his reign lasted 17 years. He was of abominable
morals; he married his sister, then repudiated her in a fashion still more detestable than that in which he
had married her. There are legends on this. He married next his step-daughter who was daughter of his sister,
then he gave her in marriage to the son he had had from his sister. His conduct was so horrible that the
Alexandrians chased him out, and he died in exile.

[PDF p. 475]

Then reigned his brother Ptolemy Alexander "the Prudent." His reign was of 10 years.

After him, reigned his son Ptolemy Dionysos. During his reign, which was of 38 years, the general of the
Romans seized Jerusalem and obliged the Jews to pay the tax of the capitation. In his time also, manifested
themselves frightful signs: there appeared in the sky, to the southeast of the town of Rome, a fire with
gigantic flames; another time a man who was making bread, having broken one, there flowed from it blood in
torrents; for three consecutive days, there fell on the town of Rome a hail mixed with stones and shards;
the earth opened up, and there formed in it enormous crevasses from which came out flames so long that they
reached, one believed, the sky; and the Romans of then saw a column that rose from the earth to the sky; it
was of the color of gold and so colossal that the sun was almost veiled by it.

After him, Cleopatra reigned two years at Alexandria. The supremacy of Alexandria -- that is, of the
Macedonian dynasty -- had therefore lasted until the first Caesar, who is also the first Roman emperor, 281
years. Caesar sent two generals, with numerous armies, to conquer Egypt, and one of them married Cleopatra,
daughter of Ptolemy Dionysos, killed his colleague, and revolted against Caesar. The latter marched against
the rebel, and, after a battle, seized Alexandria, had himself proclaimed king of Egypt, killed Cleopatra
and her two children, as well as the general who had married the queen. It is said, on the contrary, that
Cleopatra poisoned herself at the moment when she was going to fall into the power of Caesar. According to
what is reported, this queen was endowed with resolution, science, and judgment; it is she also who dug the
canal of Alexandria to bring there the water of Egypt, and who raised in this town marvelous monuments, such
as the temple of Saturn where she erected a statue of black bronze. The Alexandrians and the Egyptians
consecrated to her as a feast the 22nd day of Hathor; the Greeks came there in pilgrimage from all sides, and
one sacrificed to her innumerable victims. When the Christian religion made its appearance at Alexandria, the
temple of Saturn was converted into a church and remained thus until the moment when it was destroyed by the
army of Mo'ezz li din Allah, at the time of his arrival from the Maghreb in Egypt in 358 [25 November 968 to
13 November 969] of the hijra of the prophet.

[PDF p. 476]

It is said that it is Cleopatra who raised in Egypt the wall of the Old Woman; but that does not seem exact.
To her is attributed also the construction of a meqias (Nilometer) in the town of Akhmim and of another at
Antinoë. It is claimed still that she reigned 30 years, but that neither is true. The death of Cleopatra put
an end to the kingdom of Egypt; this country passed under the domination of the kings of Roum who inhabit the
town of Rome, then under that of the emperors of Roum who reside at Constantinople and who continued to send
there governors of their choice, whose seat was at Alexandria, until the moment of the invasion of 'Amr ben
El 'As and the Muslims to whom God delivered the citadel, Alexandria, and all of Egypt. The name of Cleopatra
signifies, it is said, "the Weeper."

From the fall of the dynasty of the Ptolemies to the conquest of Egypt by 'Amr ben El 'As, there have elapsed
670 and some years. In this interval, the kings of Persia carried off several victories over the Caesars from
whom they took Syria; they even had themselves proclaimed kings of Egypt and Alexandria, in the time of
Cosrou Abrawiz (Khosrow Parviz), son of Hormuz, who sent into Egypt a general, who seized Alexandria, killed
the Greeks who were there, and maintained himself there for ten years. Heraclius having become emperor of
Roum, gathered all the forces of his empire and set out from Constantinople; master of Hama and of Damascus,
he went to Jerusalem which the Persians had destroyed, and gave the order to rebuild the town; then,
penetrating into Egypt, he arrived at Alexandria, massacred the Persians who were there, and installed a
patrician (patrice). After which, he returned to Constantinople, and from then on, Egypt remained under the
domination of Roum until the Muslim conquest. All the constructions of brick that one meets in Egypt are, it
is said, Persian, while all the constructions of stone are Greek. And God is the most learned.

[PDF p. 477]

CHAPTER IX
OF THE PHAROS (LIGHTHOUSE) OF ALEXANDRIA

As for the Pharos of Alexandria, says El Masa'oudi, most of those of the Egyptians and the Alexandrians who
occupy themselves with the history of their country claim that it was constructed by Alexander, son of
Philip, the Macedonian; according to others, it would be the queen Dalukah who would have raised it to watch
the enemies who might have threatened Egypt. There are however those who suppose it the work of the sixth
pharaoh of Egypt; others finally admit that the founder of Rome was also the founder of Alexandria and the
constructor of the Pharos and the Pyramids of Egypt. I incline, for my part, to attribute Alexandria to
Alexander, for he is universally celebrated by his conquests of almost all the regions of the earth and,
thanks to him, the town of Alexandria has become famous. Yet, all the writers of whom we speak have recounted
on Alexandria numerous histories to demonstrate the veracity of their sayings. But no enemy threatened
Alexander on the side of the sea, and he dreaded no king who could come to attack him in his own country nor
beat him in his Empire. It is he however who established this Pharos as a watchtower. Whoever it was who
constructed it placed it on a pedestal of glass to which he gave the form of a crab; it was situated in the
open sea, at the extremity of the cape that advances into the waters. At the summit were placed statues of
copper and other materials, among others a statue that showed with the index of the right hand the sun, at
whatever place of the sky it was; if the sun rose in the firmament, the finger of the statue stretched on its
side, and, if it lowered toward the horizon, the hand of the statue lowered equally, following it in its
course. Another statue kept the hand stretched toward the sea; if some enemy advanced from this side, even
during the night, if he threatened the town or disembarked and approached close enough to see with his own
eyes, this statue uttered a piercing cry that was heard at two or three miles; and thus the inhabitants of
the town knew that the enemy threatened them and could see him themselves; a third statue uttered, each time
an hour of the day or the night had just elapsed, a cry different from the one it had uttered at the end of
the preceding hour, and this cry was agreeable to hear.

[PDF p. 478]

[OF THE PHAROS OF ALEXANDRIA, continued]

space, which has only accentuated itself since. It is reported that in the month of Ramadan of the year 344
[19 December 955 to 17 January 956] the summit of the Pharos was decapitated over a height of nearly 30
cubits by the earthquake that made itself felt at the same time in Egypt, in several localities of Syria, and
in the Maghreb; this is at least what tradition reports to us. While we were at Fostat Masr, there took place
an earthquake enormous, terrible, frightful, which lasted nearly half an hour: this happened toward the hour
of noon, the Saturday 18th of this month, corresponding to the 5th of Kanoun II and the 9th of Toba. On the
Thursday of the lentils, one gathered at the Pharos. Everyone left his house that day and went to the Pharos,
carrying his meal which comprised an inevitable dish of lentils. The doors of the Pharos were open; everyone
penetrated there, some to invoke God, some to pray, some to divert themselves. One remained there until noon,
then withdrew; and, from that day on, one watched the sea attentively to watch for the possible unexpected
arrival of enemies.

It is said that formerly the Pharos was very far from the sea, but that in the time of Constantine, son of
Constantine, the sea drew near and submerged a number of points and a quantity of churches of the town of
Alexandria; from then on, the marine invasion continues and the sea covers one parcel after another.

An author claims to have measured the Pharos and affirms that its height was 233 cubits, comprising three
distinct courses: the first course, of square form, measured 121 cubits 1/2; the second course, of octagonal
form, measured 81 cubits 1/2, and the third, of circular form, measured 31 cubits 1/2.

In his Relation of Travel, Ibn Gabir (Ibn Jubayr) says that the Pharos of Alexandria is seen from a distance
of more than 70 miles; he asserts having measured one of its four sides in 578 [7 May 1182 to 25 April 1183]
and declares that it was nearly 50 cubits (or fathoms). The height of the Pharos was more than 150 heights of
men, and at its summit was an oratory where the people prayed to obtain the celestial benediction.

According to Ibn Abd el Hakem, it has been claimed that she who constructed this Pharos [...]

[PDF p. 479]

[OF THE PHAROS OF ALEXANDRIA, continued]

of Alexandria is covered by the sea, and one draws from it fragments of all sorts of precious stones from
which one makes the bezels of rings. It is claimed that these fragments come from the drinking-vessels that
Alexander had made for himself and that, after his death, were broken by his mother and thrown by her in this
place. Others assert that Alexander himself had gathered all these stones and thrown them into the sea around
the Pharos by the bushel to protect the approaches of the Pharos against (the rapacity of) the people, for it
is the property of precious stones to be sought after. It is said that this Pharos had been provided with a
mirror at its summit only because the kings of the country of Roum were, after the death of Alexander, to
make war on the kings of Egypt and Alexandria, and that, for this reason, the king who reigned at Alexandria
installed this mirror which permitted him to see any enemy coming from the side of the sea; one could thus go
to meet whoever wished to enter the town, unless he was recognized as one of the inhabitants, which one could
not know at first, because of the multitude of houses, places, and streets that constituted the town. When
the Maghrebis, in the time of the Caliphate of Moqtader, came with the army of the master of the Occident (El
Mo'ezz li din Allah), they all went on horseback toward the Pharos, lost their way in the town, and fell into
a path leading to a well that descended toward the glass crab. There were there fissures communicating with
the sea; the horses fell into them, a great number disappeared, and one heard no more of them. They had
fallen, it is recounted, on a pedestal where their chests were broken. In the Pharos was then an oratory
where garrisoned volunteers, Egyptian and other. In 777 [2 June 1375 to 20 May 1376] the summit of the Pharos
was overturned by an earthquake. The Pharos was, it is said, constructed of juxtaposed stones held together
by means of lead, the whole seated on a vault of glass placed on the back of the crab. This Pharos counted
three hundred superposed chambers, and the beasts of burden went up with their loads to all the lodgings of
the interior of the Pharos; each of these lodgings had a window giving on the sea. On the eastern side of the
Pharos was an inscription that has been translated into Arabic, here it is: "She who constructed this
belvedere is Qaribah, daughter of Marinous the Greek, to observe the stars."

Ibn Ouacif Shah, after having recalled the history of Misraïm ben Beïsar

[PDF p. 480]

ben Ham ben Nouh, adds: They built on the sea towns, among others Raqoudah, site of the future Alexandria,
and they placed in the middle a cupola placed on pillars of gilded copper; the cupola was equally gilded.
Above the cupola one raised a tower surmounted by a mirror formed of diverse substances and whose diameter
was five spans. The height of the cupola was a hundred cubits. If anyone of the peoples of the surroundings
wished to attack them and destroy them, or advanced from the side of the sea, one directed on the arrivals
the rays of this mirror and burned them. The mirror conserved this virtue until it was overturned and
destroyed by the sea. Alexander, it is said, only reconstructed a Pharos similar to the first, on which he
placed equally a mirror, where one saw the enemies coming from the country of Roum. But a certain king of
Roum managed, by ruse, to make cease the protective virtue of this mirror which was made of glass prepared
with art.

El Masa'oudi, in his book Of the Warning and the Illustrious Men, recounts that, when the vizier of El
Moutawaqqel, Obeïd Allah ben Yahia ben Khaqan, was exiled by Mousta'ïn to Barkat in the year 248 [7 March
862 to 23 February 863], he went to Alexandria where he saw the summit of the Pharos lit by the rays of the
sun while the sun was already set, and remained persuaded that he should not break the fast as long as the
sun was not set for all the regions of the earth. He had one of his people go up to the summit of the Pharos,
carrying with him a stone, and the order was given him to look attentively at the place where the sun set and
to throw the stone at the moment when the star would disappear. The man executed the order, and the stone
reached the ground while the last prayer of the evening was finished. The vizier therefore fixed the moment
of the breaking of his fast after the last prayer of the evening. And subsequently, when he had to fast, he
acted as he had done at Alexandria; and returned to his fatherland, the memory of what he had seen came back
to his mind, and he fasted until after the last prayer of the evening; he had made of it a law for himself,
and the two times were equivalent. This shows to what point the science of the laws was little advanced and
how little one was fixed on the march of the sun from Orient to Occident. Aristotle, in his Metaphysics,
reports that, on the side of the summer Orient, is a very high mountain and cites among other particularities
concerning it the fact that, for it, the sun sets only at three hours of the night and rises three hours
before the day.

[PDF p. 481]

The Pharos of Alexandria is one of those learned and marvelous constructions that the Greek dynasty of the
Ptolemies raised after the death of the king Alexander, son of Philip, when it found itself, on land and on
sea, at war with the kings of Rome. These kings constructed the Pharos, placing at its summit an enormous
mirror, made of all sorts of chosen stones, to watch the ships of the sea that might have approached the
shore, forestalling thus their disembarkation. They saw all that in the mirror, and the alert was given to
the inhabitants before the arrival of the enemies. The height of the Pharos is currently about 230 cubits,
but formerly it reached nearly 400 cubits; the height has sensibly diminished, time, the earthquakes, and the
rains having in part crumbled it; for it rains abundantly at Alexandria; it is not like at Fostat where,
because of the more considerable altitude, it rains only rarely. The construction of the Pharos was made
following three different types: nearly the half, or at least more than the third, is of square form and in
white stones; this construction occupies nearly 110 cubits; to this square part succeeds an octagonal part
constructed in stone and in gypsum over a height of 60 and some cubits, all around are inhabited lodgings;
finally, the summit is of circular form.

Ahmed ben Touloun repaired it in part and had placed at the summit a cupola to which one was to mount by the
interior of the Pharos; but the interior of it was smooth, constructed with art and without steps. On the
north face was a Greek inscription in characters of lead incrusted in the stone; each letter was a cubit high
and a span wide. The surface occupied by the monument was about 100 cubits, but the waters of the sea, having
undermined the foundations, made the angle that faces the sea to the west collapse. Abou-l Geïch
Khamaraouyah ben Ahmed ben Touloun repaired it. Today, between the Pharos and the town of Alexandria, there
is a distance of about a mile; the Pharos is constructed at the extremity of the tongue of land of which the
sea bathes the two sides, at the entry of the present port of Alexandria and not in the old port; the latter,
indeed, is found in the antique town, and the ships no longer enter it, for it is too far from the inhabited
quarters. The port (mina) is the place where the ships of the sea come to land.

The Alexandrians recount, on the authority of their ancestors, that between the Pharos and the sea, there was
formerly about the same distance as today between the town and the Pharos, but that the water of the sea had
in little time invaded this

[PDF p. 482]

[Note: the following passage on El Oualid belongs earlier in the chapter sequence in the source layout.]

Under the reign of El Oualid ben 'Abd el Melek ben Merwan, a king of the country of Roum sent one of his
particular servants endowed with wisdom and ruse. The latter went full of confidence to a certain town of
the frontier and, provided with sumptuous presents and accompanied by an escort, he arrived at El Oualid and
recounted to him that he was one of the particular friends of the king, but that the latter had wished to
kill him in a moment of irritation; as the attempt of which he had been the object had no reason to be, he
was very affected by it and wished to make himself a Muslim. He converted therefore to Islam between the
hands of El Oualid and knew how to gain his affection by revealing to him the existence of buried treasures,
which he brought out of the earth for him at Damascus and in other towns of Syria, thanks to certain books he
possessed and in which was read the description of these treasures. Once master of these treasures and these
precious stones, El Oualid became avid and his desire only increased. His servant said to him one day: "O
Commander of the Faithful, over there are riches, precious stones, and the treasures buried by the kings." El
Oualid asked him for details. "Under the Pharos of Alexandria," answered the servant, "are the treasures of
the kings of the earth, for Alexander gathered the riches and the precious stones of Sheddad ben 'Ad and the
kings of Egypt, and for them he constructed an underground passage and a vault with cupolas, caves, and
corridors, and deposited there these treasures -- gold, silver, and precious stones; and over it, he built
this Pharos. The height of it is a thousand cubits, and a mirror surmounts it, around which are seated
criers; and as soon as these see some enemy, thanks to the gleam projected by this mirror, they warn by cries
those who are in their vicinity and raise signals that those who are more distant can see. Thus the
inhabitants are warned, the country puts itself on its guard, and the enemies find the road barred." El
Oualid therefore sent his servant with an army and people of confidence and of his intimates. The upper half
of the Pharos was demolished and the mirror ceased to be efficacious. The inhabitants, seeing this, revolted,
understanding that there was beneath it some artifice and some ruse. At this news, the servant, knowing well
that he had lied to El Oualid, and his stratagem having succeeded, fled during the night on a boat he had
prepared on purpose. The protective virtue of the Pharos was annihilated, and this monument has remained in
this state until the present -- that is, until the year 332 [4 September 943 to 23 August 944]. The base of
the Pharos

[PDF p. 483]

[she who constructed it] was the queen Cleopatra, the same who dug the canal that she succeeded, by her
ingenuity, in bringing as far as Alexandria. This canal started from the village of Kassa, facing El Karioun;
she dug it until its entry into the town and paved its ceiling.

Ahmed Ibn Touloun, when he was governor of Alexandria, built at the summit of the Pharos a cupola of wood
that was later carried off by the winds. In the time of Zaher Beïbars, one of the angles of the construction
buckled and fell; Beibars had reestablished what had been destroyed, in 673 [7 July 1274 to 26 June 1275],
and he reinstalled at the same time the emplacement of the cupola as a mosque; this mosque was destroyed in
its turn at the time of the earthquake of 702 [26 August 1302 to 14 August 1303]; during the course of the
year 703 [15 August 1303 to 13 August 1304] he had it rebuilt under the direction of the emir Rokn el din
Beïbars El Gachenkir; from then on, it has remained until our time, and El Deraoui was very well inspired
when he said, regarding the Pharos of Alexandria:

[verses:] An elevated terrace guides the one who walks at night, by its light when the nocturnal shadows
fall. I have worn there a mantle of unmixed pleasure among my friends, and this mantle was ornamented with
the memory of my companions. From its heights, a cupola gave me its shade, and from there I saw my friends
like stars. It seemed to me there that below me the sea was like a cloud and that I had raised my tent in the
middle of the sky.

Ibn Qolaqes made the following verses:

[verses:] The house surpasses, in height, the Gemini, which seem thus to have at their summit a nest of
eagles. Its foundations are anchored in the soil, the body of the building rises: in its hand is the
communication between the whales and the light. There I gave free rein to my poetry; and it made its horses
run in a hippodrome of beautiful poetry.

The vizier Abou 'Abd Allah Mohammed ben El Hassan ben 'Abd Rabbah said:

[verses:] To God the pearl of the Pharos of Alexandria; how many pupils of eyes rise toward it? It has the
nose very high, and the bone of the nose rises as if it were in ecstasy before the horizon that surrounds
it.

[PDF p. 484]

[verses, continued:] For the swift vessels, its sight is like the sleep that falls on eyelids accustomed to
insomnia.

According to 'Omar ben Abou 'Omar El Kandi, in his Marvels of Egypt, the scholars report that the Pharos
remained in the middle of Alexandria until the sea submerged its surroundings, and thus it found itself in
the middle of the waters. Do you not see with evidence that the construction and the foundations of it are
still at present in the sea?

According to Abd Allah ben 'Amr, there were in the world four marvels: the mirror suspended at the summit of
the Pharos of Alexandria; people seated at the foot of this mirror saw there those who came from
Constantinople, from whom they were however separated by all the width of the sea. Then he speaks of the
three other marvels.

[PDF p. 485]

CHAPTER X
OF THE CIRCUS THAT WAS AT ALEXANDRIA AND OF SOME OTHER MARVELS

Among the marvelous things of Egypt, says Qoda'i, there is Alexandria and the marvels it encloses, among the
number of which are: the Pharos, the Column, and the Circus where one gathered on a determined day of the
year; there, one threw a ball, and the one in whose lap it fell back was infallibly to reign over Egypt. At
one of these feasts attended 'Amr ben El 'As who received the ball in his lap, and later, in the time of
Islam, he governed Egypt. This Circus could contain a million spectators who all saw perfectly the one who
faced them. When one made some reading there, everyone heard it, and if one gave some spectacle, each saw it
distinctly to the last one, without being in any way hindered by the multitude of tiers that rose before or
behind him.

In the year 18 of the hijra [12 January 639 to 1 January 640], says Ibn Abd El Hakem, 'Omar ben El Khattab
was marching against Damascus, when 'Amr ben El 'As secretly approached him and asked him for the
authorization to go attack Egypt. 'Amr had already come to this country in the time of the ignorance and knew
its roads; he had also seen there a great number of the things it enclosed. Here is on what occasion he had
come to Egypt: Going to Jerusalem with people of Qoreich to traffic there, they met a Greek priest of
Alexandria who came to pray at Jerusalem. This priest had gone to promenade on one of the neighboring
mountains where 'Amr was pasturing his camels and those of his companions, for the guard of the camels fell
to each of them in turn; 'Amr was therefore keeping his flock when the priest passed near him, overwhelmed by
an ardent thirst, for the heat was excessive. He stopped near 'Amr and asked him for drink. 'Amr gave him
water from his skin, and the priest, having quenched his thirst, fell asleep there. Near the sleeper was a
hole from which came out an enormous viper; 'Amr, having perceived it, launched at it an arrow and killed it.
On his waking, the priest, seeing the enormous reptile against which God had protected him, asked 'Amr what
it was. 'Amr informed him that he had killed the

[PDF p. 486]

viper with an arrow-shot. The priest then, approaching 'Amr, kissed him on the head and said to him: "God, by
your intermediary, has saved my life twice; first in appeasing my ardent thirst, then in protecting me
against this serpent. What have you come to seek in this country?" "I have come here," answered 'Amr, "with
my companions to seek the benefits that commerce gives." "And how much can this commerce bring you?" said the
priest. "I hope," resumed 'Amr, "to be able to gain enough to buy myself a camel; I possess only two, the one
I hope to gain will make the third." "Tell me what is, among you, the price of blood." "A hundred camels."
"But if one has no camels, and one possesses only dinars!" "In that case," said 'Amr, "it is a thousand
dinars." "I am a stranger in this country," said the priest, "and have come only to pray in the temple of
Jerusalem and visit this mountain; I will stay here only a month, it is a vow I have made and imposed on
myself. After that, I will return to my country. Will you come with me? There, I attest God of it and take
him as witness, I will pay you twice the price of blood, for God has saved me twice by your intermediary."
"Where is your country?" asked 'Amr. "I inhabit Egypt," said the priest, "in the town that is called
Alexandria." "I do not know it," said 'Amr, "and have never gone there." "When you will have come there,"
said the priest, "you will recognize that you have never seen a town like it." "And will you pay me what you
say?" asked 'Amr; "do you take toward me the engagement and the responsibility of it?" "Thanks to you," said
the priest; "God is my witness and I hold him guarantor that I will pay it to you and bring you back to your
companions." "And how long will my absence last?" "A month," said the priest; "ten days to go, ten days to
stay at Alexandria, and ten days to return. I promise to protect you during the going and to give you an
escort for the return." "Wait then," said 'Amr, "that I consult my companions on it." And having gone to
them, he made known to them the proposition of the priest and said to them: "Wait for my return and I
promise to give you the half of the sum, on condition that one of you accompany me." "It is agreed," they
said, and one of them was sent with him. 'Amr and his companion set out with the priest and arrived in
Egypt; 'Amr, seeing the prosperity of the country, its numerous population, its riches, and its treasures,
was marveled and said to the priest: "I have never seen a country like it." They continued their route until
Alexandria; 'Amr could admire the numerous riches that were there, the luxury of the

[PDF p. 487]

constructions and the considerable number of the inhabitants, and his astonishment was immense. The arrival
of 'Amr at Alexandria coincided with the celebration of a feast in which was assembled a crowd of kings and
princes of the country; the kings threw in the air a ball of gold enriched with precious stones and before
which they ran, lap deployed, for, according to what is recounted on the subject of this ball and of what had
already happened regarding it, if it falls in the lap of someone, that one does not die without having
reigned over the country.

'Amr having arrived at Alexandria, the priest treated him magnificently, made him present of a robe of
brocade, clad him in it, and both took their place in the middle of the assembly where one threw the ball
and where each precipitated himself to receive it in his lap. Now, the ball having been launched, stopped
only in the lap of 'Amr. All were astonished and said: "This ball has never lied to us but this time! Do you
see this Arab reigning over us! That will never happen." And the priest, mingling with the Alexandrians,
informed them that 'Amr had saved his life twice and that he had to pay him two thousand dinars, asking them
to gather this sum for him. Which they did; and 'Amr, having received his two thousand dinars, set out with
his companion. The priest furnished them a guide and a courier, and showed himself full of generosity and
benevolence for them. They arrived finally near their companions. And it is thus that 'Amr learned the road
to Egypt, that he knew its revenues, and according to what he saw there, he retained that it was the country
richest in marvels and in resources. Returned to his companions, 'Amr paid them a thousand dinars and kept
the other thousand for himself and, as he repeated himself, it was the first treasure that fell to him and
that had been gathered for him.

[PDF p. 488]

CHAPTER XI
OF THE COLUMN OF THE MASTS

This column is a block of spotted red granite. Around it were ranged nearly 400 other columns that were
broken by Qoraga, vali of Alexandria, in the time of the sultan Salah el din Yousef ben Ayoub, and thrown on
the shore of the sea to hinder the march of the enemies who approached. This column is, it is said, one of
those that supported the porticoes where Aristotle taught philosophy -- a veritable temple of science where
was deposited the treasure of the books, burned later by 'Amr ben El 'As, on the orders of 'Omar ben El
Khattab. It was high, it is said, 70 cubits; its diameter is 5 cubits. An author affirms that its length
between the base and the capital was 62 cubits 1/6 and that the capital had 28 cubits 1/2, which makes in
total 85 cubits 2/3. The length of the base was 12 cubits and that of the capital 7 cubits 1/2.

One reads in El Masa'oudi: On the western bank of the Said of Egypt, there is an enormous mountain of marble
where the ancients cut columns and other objects that they transported after having detached them. As for
the columns, bases, and capitals that the Egyptians name Assouanites and from which one has made millstones,
the ancients cut them in the quarry, two hundred years before the origin of Christianity; of those form part
the columns of Alexandria and this column which is so colossal that no one knows of one similar. I have seen,
in the mountain of Assouan, the sister of these columns which had been worked and cut without detaching it
from the quarry and without one having carried it off. The ancients wished to show us by that how one did to
detach them from the mountain, and to lead them then to the point where one wished finally to raise them.

There were at Alexandria enormous columns, in all sorts of stones and marbles, of which thousands of men had
difficulty detaching the smallest fragment and which one raised between earth and sky; their height reached
more than a hundred cubits; the pedestals, which served them as support, had a perimeter varying from 15 to
20 cubits, and the capital measured [...]

[PDF p. 489]

[OF THE COLUMN OF THE MASTS, continued]

ten cubits of width by ten cubits of height and as much of thickness, and these columns were of surprising
colors.

There was also at Alexandria, on a hill raised facing the gate of the town, a colossal palace measuring 500
cubits of length by half as much of width; the gate of it was of a marvelous art, each jamb being made of a
single piece, as well as the lintel. This palace enclosed nearly a hundred pillars, and, facing the palace,
rose a gigantic pillar such as never has one heard speak of a similar pillar. It was wide 36 spans and its
height was so great that in launching a stone one could not reach the summit of it; this pillar was crowned
with a capital of admirable work and that must have been surmounted by some object; its foot reposed on a
socle of red stone, of beautiful execution, and of which each side measured 20 spans of length by a height
of 8 spans. The rod fixed in the column was of iron and penetrated into the soil. I have seen, in great
winds, the column move, while the base remained immobile and crumbled as a consequence of the violence of
the movement of the column. This monument was considered as one of the marvels of the world, and a number of
people have imagined that it was the work of the genies who would have executed it for Solomon, son of David;
for one attributes habitually to the genies every surprising work. But this idea is false, the column in
question being the work of the ancient Egyptians. In the middle of this palace was a dome surrounded by
pillars, on the ensemble of which reposed another dome, made of a single block of white marble, as beautiful
as all you have been able to see of most beautiful in this kind of work.

It is recounted that a king of Egypt, having come to Alexandria, was marveled in seeing this palace and
wished to construct one similar; he gathered workers and engineers to raise him a magnificent palace on the
model of the first. All declared themselves powerless to execute it, except an old man who was among them and
who engaged himself to construct a similar palace. The king, all joyous, authorized him to ask for what would
be necessary to him in victuals, tools, and workers. "Let there be brought to me," said the old man, "two
vigorous bulls and a great chariot." They were brought to him on the spot, and, having gone to the old
cemetery, the old man dug there a pit, brought to light an enormous skull that was hoisted onto the chariot,
thanks to the arms of a great number of men, and the two bulls, despite all their vigor, succeeded in
dragging it only with much pains and efforts. Arrived with the skull in

[PDF p. 490]

the presence of the king, the old man said to him: "O my lord, if God permits that one furnish me men whose
head be similar to that which possessed this skull, I will make you a palace similar to the palace you have
seen." The king understood that the people of his time were incapable of raising a like palace.

It is recounted that there was at Alexandria, at the home of a butcher who used it to weigh meat, a tooth of
a man weighing 8 ratls.

The Column of the Masts (?) which is today at Alexandria outside the town, is one of the seven columns that
(were brought from the Said); this one was brought by El Batoun ben Marrât El 'Adi, who carried it under his
armpit from the red mountain of Ibrim, south of Assouan, to Alexandria. The side of it was broken because El
Batoun was one of the least strong of the men of his tribe; this was painful to Ya'mer ben Sheddad ben 'Ad:
"To whoever brings me one (intact)," he said, "I will give the half of my kingdom." El Gahed ben Senan El
Thamoudi came with another column; he was very strong and brought it under his arm from Assouan. And the
other men of the tribe came likewise, each bearing a column. El Garoud ben Qotn El Moutafeki raised these
seven columns, and the erection was finished only after one had chosen a propitious rising of the planets,
as was the custom for almost all one executed. A writer asserts that in the ancient times, the stone was soft
and that one made then the columns of Na'et, of Mâreb, of Binoun, of Mater, of the Yemen, those of Damascus,
of Egypt, of Madian, of Tadmor (Palmyra). In that time everything was endowed with speech. Ommayah ben
Abou-l Sait said:

[verses:] And they had no garments and they were naked, and for them the solid rock was soft.

The Column of the Masts, it is said, formed part of the ensemble of the columns that supported the portico
named House of the Science, and this at the epoch when the scholars of the Occident divided themselves into
five categories: (1) the disciples of this portico; (2) the disciples of the pillar, who were at Balbek; (3)
the disciples of the shade, at Antioch; (4) the disciples of the temples, in the Said of Egypt, and (5) the
seekers, in Macedonia. It seems to me that some ignorant person will blame me for having written this
chapter, treating its content

[PDF p. 490, continued]

of absurdities and fables invented at pleasure and taxing the author with lying; but let my account not
surprise you and listen to what God says on the subject of 'Ad, tribe of Houd:

[PDF p. 491]

"Remember that he has established you successors of the people of Noah and that he has enlarged your stature"
(Koran, VII, 67) -- that is, that he has rendered you greater and has increased your body. 'Abd Allah ben
'Abbas says that the greatest of the Adites had 100 cubits and the smallest 60; the increase in question
relates to the stature of their fathers, or, according to others, to the stature of the people of Noah.
Ouaheb ben Monabbah says: "The head of one of these men was similar to an enormous cupola; in one of their
eyes the lionesses could give birth; likewise in their nose." Shahr ben Houtheb reports that Abou Harirat had
said: "Certainly, the people of the people of 'Ad would carry the two leaves (of a door) that 500 men of this
country would not manage to shake." An Adite, in striking the soil with the foot, entered into it. 'Abd Allah
ben Lahi'at reports, on the authority of Yezid ben 'Amr El Mo'aferi, that Ibn Bagrat had said: "Seventy men
of the people of Moses could put themselves in the shade under the skull of an Amalecite." "One recounted to
me," says Zeïd ben Aslam, "that a hyena and her young lived in the cavity of the eye of a man of Amalec." And
God says: "Do you not see what your Lord did with the people of 'Ad, who inhabited Iram Zat El 'Amad, town
whose like did not exist in any country?" (Koran, LXXXIX, 5, 6.) El Moubarrad says: El Khansa, by [the word],
means the height of the columns. When one says [the expression], that signifies: a man long (like a column).
The expression Iram Zat el 'Amad, employed by God, applies to the length of the columns. El Baghaoui says
that one named this town Zat El 'Amad because it belonged to a nomad tribe of the people of 'Amad; it is what
Qotadah, Mogahed, El Kelbi say, and it is the opinion of 'Ata according to Ibn Abbas. Another claimed that it
owed this name to the size of its inhabitants who, as Ibn Abbas says, were tall like columns.

Each of them, says Moqâtel, was high 12 cubits, and in the Kochaf of El Zamakhshari it is said that the
stature of the Adites has never been equaled in any country; they were of a size and a force surprising; the
size of a man reached there 400 cubits; however great a stone was, an Adite could lift it and throw it on the
serpents to kill them. Another reports that, under the caliphate of Moqtader Billah Abou-l Fadl Ga'far ben Al
Mo'tadad, one discovered in Egypt a hiding place enclosing a human rib 14 spans long and 3 wide.

The eyes of the sons of Adam are small and their soul develops itself in a

[PDF p. 492]

narrow space; thus when one comes to speak to them of things out of the reach of their intelligence or that
surpass their corporeal greatness, of those things for which they have not at their reach identical objects
that can serve them as a term of comparison, unless they have seen or fabricated themselves these objects,
quickly they hasten to set aside these things and doubt what one reports to them, unless they are endowed
with science and intelligence. In this last case, they seek to assure themselves of the truth of what one
sets forth to them and often pass the night to make themselves account of it or to set it forth in their turn
to others. But how to acquire the truth on such accounts? The truth is what the prophet of God said: "God
created Adam high 60 cubits; since, the human size has only decreased until this day." Mohammed ben 'Abd el
Rahim ben Soliman ben Rabi' El Qeisi El Gharanâti recounts what follows in the book Present of the Hearts:
"In the work entitled History of the Kings, El Sha'bi reports that El Dahak ben 'Alouan, at the moment when
Lam ben 'Amer fled from his court to reach the regions of the North, sent in pursuit of him two emirs, each
accompanied by a troop of fierce people. One of these emirs took the direction of Balghar, the other that of
Bashqerd, and their troops installed themselves in these two towns. El Aqlichi says having seen in Bashqerd
their images and their tombs. "I have seen among other things," he adds, "a tooth of one of them; it measured
4 spans of length by 2 spans of width. I have also had in my hands at Bashqerd the half of the root of
another tooth that one had extracted for me from the inferior jaw (of a skeleton); it was wide a span and
weighed 200 metsqals; I weighed it myself, and it is still today in my house at Bashqerd. The arm of one of
these skeletons was long 28 cubits, and each of its ribs, wide 3 spans and more, resembled a plaque of
marble. One exhumed for me the half of a wrist, which was so heavy that I could not move it with a single
hand and had to employ the two hands to lift it. I can assure having seen in the town of Balghar, in the year
530 [11 October 1135 to 28 September 1136], a descendant of the Adites, a man whose size surpassed 5 cubits;
one called him Danqa. This man put a horse under his arm as easily as an ordinary man would have done of a
child; and, if there arose some war in the country, he went to combat armed with an oak that he had uprooted

[PDF p. 493]

and that he carried in the hand like a stick; each time he struck an elephant with it, the animal fell dead.
He was good and humble, and every time he met me, he saluted me, invited me, and treated me generously. I
hardly reached to his belt. He had a sister as tall as he, whom I have seen many times. The cadi of Balghar,
Ya'qoub ben Na'man, recounted that this Adite woman had killed her husband, who was called Adam and was one
of the strongest men of Balghar. In pressing him against her chest, she broke his ribs, and he died on the
spot. There was in Balghar only one bath that had doors wide enough to permit them to enter."

The governor, Abou 'Abd Allah Mohammed ben Mohammed ben Ahmed El Fariabi, recounted to me that his father had
seen a tomb cleared at Carthage in Africa; one had discovered there the skeleton of a man of gigantic size;
his head was big like the heads of two powerful bulls; near him was a plaque of marble bearing an inscription
in musnad characters, which are the characters of the Adites; the letters were separated, and here is what
the inscription signified: "I, Koush ben Kana'an, son of the kings of the tribe of 'Ad, I reigned in this
country over a thousand towns; I lay with a thousand virgins and I had as mounts of race 7,000 coursers --
red, yellow, piebald, white, and black. But all that served me in nothing. A crier came toward me to utter
his cry and made me go out of the world. Let every intelligent man, who will come after me, meditate the
example I offer him and recite this:

[verses:] O you who standing contemplate the sky, on the ruins of a destroyed quarter, stop and listen; be
instructed by the example, if you are a man of mind. Yesterday we were above (the earth), today we are below.
Every thing has a goal; every thing has an end."

The sultan Abou Bekr ben Yahia El Hafasi, lord of Tunis, gave the order to close again this tomb, and the
tomb was filled in again. The author (Maqrizi) adds: I too have had knowledge of something analogous, here is
how: One day, in the year 790 [11 January to 30 December 1388], a troop of quarriers, who disputed a treasure
[...]

[PDF p. 494]

[OF THE COLUMN OF THE MASTS, continued]

found by them in the mountain of Moqattam, presented themselves before the sultan El Melek El Zaher Barqouq.
As they were occupied in cutting stones in a grotto that faces the north flank of the citadel of the
mountain, they had discovered a black stone bearing an inscription. They united their efforts to cut the
rock at the foot of this stone, hoping to discover a treasure. They came to an enormous column that rose in
the heart of the mountain and, in their haste, seizing their iron bars, struck the column and put it to
pieces. This column was hollow and contained the body of a man, raised vertically on his feet, and from
whose head escaped numerous dinars that fell on the heads of the quarriers. They set about dividing them
among themselves, but, far from being in agreement, they disputed so much that their affair became known and
they were brought before the sultan. The latter sent an emissary who found again the grotto and discovered
the stone and the column which was broken. One removed from the quarriers what they had of dinars; but one
could discover no one who could read what was engraved on the stone. The populace, having had wind of the
news, went toward the grotto where each played with the fragments of the skeleton. Someone who had seen one
of the teeth of the dead man recounted to me that it was black and of the size of an eggplant and that the
bone of the leg, between the foot and the knee, measured 5 cubits; the total size must in proportion have
reached the height of 20 cubits and even more; the root of a single one of his teeth being of the size of an
eggplant, the man must therefore have been as tall as the great cupola.

The illustrious master, the Cadi of the Cadis of Damascus, Shehab el din Ahmed ben Aly ben Ibrahim El
Hasseini, better known under the name of Ibn 'Adnân or of Ibn Abou-l Genn, recounted to me that in the year
814 [25 April 1411 to 12 April 1412], he had found in the cemetery, near the little gate of Damascus, a tomb
where the diggers who cleared it discovered a skeleton. The tomb was not adorned, and one had quickly found
the well where one had made the cadaver descend. From this well there came out a quantity of blue flies so
considerable that they almost stole from the diggers the rays of the sun. The diggers descended into this
well found a sarcophagus 22 cubits long and enclosing a body extended following the length of the vat and
fallen into dust. One of those who had seen this tomb recounted to me that there was there a

[PDF p. 495]

human tooth broken in three pieces, and that he had taken one of them. The tooth was big like a watermelon
and he had had it weighed before him; it weighed 2 ratls and 9 ounces, in ratls of Syria; the piece he had
broken from it weighed 2 ounces of Syria. According to this weight, the entire molar must have weighed nearly
12 ratls of Egypt, and God knows better.

[PDF p. 496]

CHAPTER XII
A GLANCE AT WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ON THE SUBJECT OF ALEXANDRIA

According to Abou 'Amr El Kandi, one is in agreement that there is in the world no other town than Alexandria
that can correspond to three series [of marvels]. When 'Abd El 'Aziz ben Merwan entered Alexandria, he
questioned a Greek scholar on its subject and on the number of its inhabitants: "By God," he answered, "O
emir, never was any king able to know the number of them; as for the Jews, on whom one was able to inform
you, they were 600,000 according to the enumeration executed by order of a Greek king. But what is this
figure beside the ruins one finds on all sides? It has been reported to me that a certain king of the Persian
dynasty who reigned in Egypt had imposed a dinar on each adult Alexandrian. The notables and the scholars of
the town came to find the king and said to him: O king, do not give yourself this trouble; for Alexander
took three hundred years to build the town, which remained flourishing for 300 other years, but which for 300
years has been ruined. Its inhabitants, for 70 years, could walk in the streets of the town only provided
with black veils to protect their eyes against the dazzling whiteness of the walls."

Among the divine citations that have been made of it, it is fitting to recall that a learned commentator
regards it as the town that God, in his sacred book, wished to designate when he says: "Iram Zat El 'Amad
which has not its like in the world" (Koran, LXXXIX, 6, 7). Ahmed ben Saleh reports that one day Sofian ben
'Eïïnah said to him: "O Egyptian, where do you live?" "At Fostat," he answered. "Have you been to
Alexandria?" "Yes." "It is," said Sofian, "the quiver where God has deposited the best of his arrows."

Abd Allah ben Marzouq El Sadfi says: "When one announced to me that my cousin Khaled ben Yezid had died at
Alexandria, I met one after the other Mousa ben 'Aly ben Rabah, 'Abd Allah ben Lahi'ah, and El Leith ben
Sa'd, who all said to me: 'Is he not dead at Alexandria?' 'Yes,' I answered. 'Then, he lives with God who
favors him and recompenses him for his sojourn on the earth, and he will have the recompense of the martyr,
(for) God will resurrect him for that.'" Those who occupy themselves with cosmography, with the description
of the countries, with the arrangement of the climates and the regions, affirm that in no

[PDF p. 497]

country of the world is the age of men as long as at Marbout, in the district of Alexandria, and at the Ouadi
Farghanah. According to El Hassan ben Safouan, Alexandria, Tennis, and the other similar countries enjoy,
thanks to the vicinity of the sea, a moderate temperature, without excessive heat or cold; the east wind,
which blows there more particularly, only renders them stronger and refines them, removing from them all
care and guarding them from the rudeness that the people of Yachmoun possess by nature and by temperament.
The characteristic of the Alexandrians is avarice. Gelal el din ben Mokram ben Abou-l Hassan ben Ahmed El
Khozragi, the master of those who know by heart, said:

[verses:] He who descends at Alexandria receives as a gift of hospitality only water or the description of
the column of El Souari. When one wishes to treat him well, one goes so far as to give him sweet air and the
indication of the Pharos; one paints for him also the sea and its waves, joining to it the description of the
great Greek boats. Let the guest (of the Alexandrian) not have the ambition of having bread, for there is
there for that letter no reader.

Ahmed ben Gordadiah says: From Fostat to Daouat el Sahel, there are 24 miles; from there to Marbout 30 miles,
then to Kom Sherik 30 miles, then to Karioun 24 miles, then to Alexandria 24 miles. Another said: The road to
Alexandria, in the season of low water, follows the towns and the villages; this road goes first from
Shatnouf to Sabak El Obeid, a station that encloses a pretty port; distance 12 saqs. From Sabak to Menouf, a
great town where are baths and markets and whose inhabitants count rich and notable people, there are 16
saqs. From Menouf to Mehallah Sard, where is a pulpit, a bath, hostelries, an important market, 16 saqs; from
Mehallah Sard to Sakha, a great town with numerous baths and markets, a very extensive province, a
considerable region, seat of a military administration with an important garrison, a country very productive
in flax, radish oil, and magnificent wheat, 16 saqs. From Sakha to Shoubra Kamiah, a great town enclosing a
mosque and markets, 16 saqs. From Shoubra Kamiah to Masir, a mosque and markets, 16 saqs; from Masir to
Senhour, a town of considerable extent with baths and markets, an important province, 16 saqs; from Senhour
to El Nakhoum, a province comprising baths, hostelries, markets, 16 saqs; from El Nakhoum to Nestarou, a town
formerly considerable and very beautiful, on the lake of Yachmoun,

[PDF p. 498]

20 saqs; from Nestarou to Bourlos, a town where reside the numerous fishermen of the lake and where are
baths, 10 saqs; from Bourlos to Khana, a fortress on the shore of the sea, 10 saqs; from Khana to Rosetta, a
town built on the Nile and where this river throws itself into the sea by the mouth known under the name of
mouth of Ashtoum, from the name of the village that is at the entry, 30 saqs; there were there important
markets and a bath; the palms abound there and one pays there a duty on the objects brought from Alexandria.

This road, from Shatnouf to Rosetta, unless it be cut by the high waters, is the best way to go to
Alexandria; no other equals it, and it leads to all the points of the earth. Among the stuffs woven at
Alexandria is that tissue of flax that one names El Sharb, of which each drahme is worth a dirhem of silver,
and also those sorts of embroideries that one sells for several times their weight in silver.

[PDF p. 499]

CHAPTER XIII
OF THE CONQUEST OF ALEXANDRIA

Abou 'Amr El Kandi reports that when the Muslims had made themselves masters of the citadel and what it
enclosed, 'Amr gathered his troops to march against Alexandria and set out in Rabi' I of the year 20 [18
February to 19 March 641], or, according to others, in Gamadi II of the same year [18 May to 17 June 641].

According to Seïf ben 'Omar, 'Amr ben El 'As, while he was himself at Aïn Shams, sent to Alexandria 'Ouf ben
Malek who had it said to the inhabitants that, if they wished to submit, one would accord them the aman
(safe-conduct). The Alexandrians having consented to it, 'Ouf entered into parleys with them, the troops of
'Amr being still at 'Aïn Shams, and having set out only during the negotiations.

"It is said," recounts Ibn 'Abd el Hakem, "that El Maqoqos made peace with 'Amr ben El 'As only when the
latter had seized Alexandria after a siege of three months, a siege so pressing that the inhabitants dreaded
'Amr. El Maqoqos asked for the Alexandrians a peace similar to that which had been consented to the Copts, on
condition of ratification on the part of the emperor. Yezid ben Abou Habib recounted to us that the Greek El
Maqoqos was the grand master of Egypt with whom 'Amr ben El 'As signed a treaty permitting certain Greeks who
desired it to withdraw, and certain others to remain for affairs mentioned in the treaty. When the news of it
reached Heraclius, emperor of the Greeks, he entered into a violent anger and opposed the most formal
refusal. He had set out on the spot an army; the gates of Alexandria were closed and war was declared on
'Amr. It is then that El Maqoqos came to find the latter and said to him: "I ask you three things." "What are
they?" asked 'Amr. "First you will not accord to the Greeks what you have accorded to me, for I have been
good to them and they have been wicked to me; next, you will not break with the Copts, for they are in no way
involved in the (present) rupture; finally, in what concerns me, if I come to die, you will have me buried at
Bakhans." "All that is

[PDF p. 500]

easy for us," said 'Amr. And profiting from the fact that the sortie was still possible, 'Amr withdrew with
the Muslims, accompanied by a crowd of the principal of the Copts who assured them the road and prepared for
them the ways and the encampment. Thus the Copts assisted them in all the combats that the Muslims delivered
to the Greeks; the latter, having been informed of it, made their preparations in consequence and asked for
reinforcements; one dispatched to them from the country of Roum ships laden with Greek soldiers, arms, and
provisions. (These having disembarked), 'Amr went to meet them and set out from Fostat for Alexandria; he met
no one until Marbout; there, he collided with a troop of Greeks with whom he engaged a light skirmish. God
put the Greeks to flight, and 'Amr, continuing his route, met the bulk of the Greeks at Kom Sherik; a combat
was engaged that lasted three days, at the end of which God gave the victory to the Muslims and the Greeks
showed their shoulders (fled).

According to another version, 'Amr (after the first engagement) would have sent in pursuit of the Greeks
Sherik ben Sami who reached them near the hill, which took from him the name of Kom Sherik. Sherik marched
therefore in advance of the army of 'Amr which had remained at Marbout, but the Greeks obliged him to take
refuge near the Kom (hill); Sherik having entrenched himself there, was surrounded there by the Greeks.
Seeing himself thus closely pressed, Sherik ben Sami gave an order to Abou Na'mat Mâlek ben Na'mat El Sadfi,
owner of the chestnut horse named Ashqar Sadf whose speed no mount equaled. Abou Na'mat took his run and
leaped from the Kom over the Greeks who set about pursuing him, but without reaching him. Abou Na'mat could
therefore rejoin 'Amr and warn him of what was happening. 'Amr set out immediately, and the Greeks, having
learned it, stirred themselves. The two armies met at Salatis, where a fierce combat was engaged. God put the
Greeks to rout, and the two armies having met again at Karioun, a combat was engaged that lasted more than
ten days. 'Abd Allah ben 'Amr fought in the first rank, and the standard-bearer was then Ouardan, freedman
of 'Amr. 'Abd Allah ben 'Amr, already covered with numerous wounds, cried: "O Ouardan, if you drew back a
little, we could rest." "You wish to rest?" said Ouardan. "The rest is in front and not behind." And 'Abd
Allah carried himself forward. A messenger of his father having come to question him on his wounds, he said:

[PDF p. 501]

[verses:] I say to her, that she may come out of her sadness and console herself: Calm yourselves! Either
you will gain something by it, or at least you will rest.

These verses are of 'Amr ben El Atnabah; he was a man of the tribe of the Benou Naggar and neighbor of El
Mo'az ben El Na'man. The latter (El Na'man) having been killed, Mo'az said: "He can only have been killed by
'Amr ben El 'Atnabah." This 'Amr was then the most noble of the tribe of Khazreg, and he answered:

[verses:] Oh! who will say on my part to those who believe themselves capable (of killing me) -- (sometimes
an advice can be given to a counselor) -- : You are in a state such that you cannot do me the slightest harm
by a veiled or clear word. Someone of you will promptly attempt to do it, but the trace of a tongue is not
that which a wound leaves. By my innocence, by the experience I have acquired, by the precious praises I have
been able to conquer, by the largesses I spread to set aside the ills of others, by my courage to brave the
valiant heroes, by what I say to myself each time I cannot appease and console myself: "Be at rest, you will
praise yourself for the result or at least you will rest," I will defend my good actions, I will preserve my
honor intact, with a sword having the color of limpid salt and a soul that can find no rest in face of a bad
thing.

[Philological gloss on three Arabic words follows.]

The messenger returned to 'Amr and informed him of what had been said to him: "It is truly my son," said
'Amr, and he addressed to God the prayer of danger. God therefore gave the victory to the Muslims who killed
a considerable number of Greeks and pursued the enemy until Alexandria where the Greeks entrenched
themselves. The town was surrounded by solid and uninterrupted ramparts, citadel after citadel. The Muslims
took position and installed themselves, seconded by the Coptic chiefs who procured them the necessary
victuals and fodder. This lasted two months thus. Then there occurred a change. Cavaliers, launched from the
side of the lake hidden by the citadel, charged

[PDF p. 502]

'Amr and killed twelve Muslim infantry. The Greek emperor sent on several occasions to Alexandria ships
bringing reinforcements more and more important to the besieged.

The Greek emperor said: "By God! if the Arabs seize Alexandria, it is done with the Greeks, they will perish."
For the Greeks had nowhere churches greater than the churches of Alexandria and, after the conquest of Syria
by the Arabs, the feasts of the Greeks were celebrated at Alexandria. And the emperor said: "By God! if they
take Alexandria from us, the Greeks are lost and their Empire destroyed." Then he made his preparations and
organized his departure for Alexandria, in order to see the siege of it with his own eyes. And when his
preparations were finished, God overturned him and made him die, and his provisions served the Muslims. He
died in the year 19, and by his death, God broke the sting of the Greeks and many of those who had fled
returned.

Heraclius, says El Leith, died in the year 20 [2 January to 20 December 640], that during which was conquered
Caesarea of Syria. The Arabs, made audacious by this victory, did not cease to combat the Alexandrians and
delivered them fierce combats. A handful of Greeks, come out by the gate of the citadel of Alexandria, had
thrown themselves on a troop of Muslims and had killed them a man of the tribe of Maharrah; they cut off his
head and carried it off. The Maharrah entered into a violent anger and declared that they would not bury the
cadaver of their companion without his head. "Carry yourselves," said 'Amr to them, "as you would do facing
people who care about your anger. If some Greek troop comes out, throw yourselves on it, kill it a man and
throw them his head; they will throw you that of your companion." Indeed, the Greeks having made a sortie,
the Maharrah threw themselves on them, killed one of their patricians, cut off his head, and threw it to the
Greeks who sent back that of the Maharrah. "And now," said 'Amr to them, "bury your companion."

"Of the three tribes of Egypt," said 'Amr, "the Maharrah beat and are not beaten, the 'Afeq are beaten and
do not beat, and the Bêla have been for the most part companions of the Prophet and have, as principal
quality, that of being excellent cavaliers." A man having proposed to 'Amr to dispose machines to launch
stones and demolish the walls, 'Amr answered him:

[PDF p. 503]

"Arrange yourself so that your rank may disappear?" "The enemies are already there," one said to him once,
"and we fear for the veil (they wished to speak of the wife of 'Amr)." "Many other veils will have been taken
before," he answered.

The siege dragging on in length, a Greek presented himself who challenged Mousallimah ben Mokhalled to
combat. The Greek overturned the latter and, having made him fall from his horse, rushed upon him to kill
him, when a companion of Mousallimah ran to his rescue. Mousallimah no longer struggled and seemed condemned;
the Greek, all joyous, struck on the two Muslims, which irritated 'Amr. Mousallimah was very fleshy and his
belly was heavy. "Who has given me such a man?" cried 'Amr. "Is it not this individual who resembles a woman
and wishes to meddle in what men do?" Mousallimah, furious, resumed without answering the combat; the
combatants entered into the citadel of Alexandria and the combat continued, but the Greeks, arriving in a
crowd, forced the Arabs to withdraw, with the exception of four men who, dispersed in the citadel, were shut
up in it. One of them was 'Amr ben El 'As, the second was Mousallimah; the name of the two others has not
reached us. They found themselves therefore separated from their companions, but the Greeks were ignorant of
who they were. Having perceived their abandonment, 'Amr ben El 'As and the others took refuge in the
underground passage of the baths; the Greeks penetrated there after them and, having made them come out, a
Greek interpreter questioned them in Arabic. "Here you are become our prisoners," he said; "surrender then
and do not kill yourselves." The Arabs refused. "You must have with you some of ours whom you retain
prisoners; we promise you to exchange you against our companions and not to kill you." The Arabs refused.
"Have you," said the Greek, "some acceptable means? (Here is one:) If our champion prevails over yours, you
will surrender to us, and we will be your masters. If on the contrary your champion prevails, we will let you
return to your companions." The Arabs declared themselves satisfied, and the agreement having been made
between the interpreter, 'Amr, Mousallimah, and their two companions, in the underground passage of the
baths, one brought the Arabs out into the open air. A man of Roum, whose courage and valor the Greeks prized,
presented himself, and the Greeks said: "One of you is going to wrestle with our companion." 'Amr wished to
present himself, but Mousallimah prevented him: "Why [...]

[PDF p. 504]

[OF THE CONQUEST OF ALEXANDRIA, continued]

commit this double fault?" he said. "You have already separated yourself from your companions, you their
chief; it is in you that their force resides, it is in your hands that their courage is deposited. They do
not know what you have become and will be happy only in seeing you reappear to lead them again to the
combats. If you are killed, what a loss for your companions! God willing, I will take your place and suffice
for the task." "Well, go," said 'Amr, "and may God favor you!" And Mousallimah advanced toward the Greek and
both turned for an hour, but God assisted Mousallimah who was victorious. He and his companions withdrew; the
Greeks, faithful to their word, kept their promise and opened them the gates of the citadel. They came out,
and it is only later that the Greeks learned that they had held in their hands the enemy general. They were
very irritated and gnawed their fists with rage at having let him escape. When they were outside, 'Amr
blushed at what had happened and said to Mousallimah: "Perish anger!" and he added: "Pardon me what I said to
you." Mousallimah pardoned him. "I have committed villainies," added 'Amr, "only three times; twice in the
time of ignorance and this one which is the third; each time I had to repent of it and to blush; but what I
blush at most is what I said to you. By God! I hope not to commit a fourth as long as I live." 'Amr besieged
Alexandria for months, and the news of it having reached 'Omar ben el Khattab: "They would not put so much
slowness into conquering this country," he cried, "if they were not plotting something." And he wrote to 'Amr
ben El 'As: "I am surprised at your slowness in conquering Egypt. Here are two years that you deliver battle,
and how would it be thus if you did not plot and if you did not act according to the desire of your enemies?
And God accords victory only to those whose intentions are pure. I send you four men and advise you that each
of them is worth a thousand infantry, as I have been able to see; and if there be others than they, those
will not prevail over them. As soon as my letter will have reached you, make a proclamation to your men and
exhort them to combat the enemies; let them arm themselves with patience and resolution; put at their head
the four men I send you, place them in front of the troops, and let everyone march and combat as a single
man. Let this be done at the end of Friday, at the hour when mercy descends, in the time of the granting. Let
all the army utter a cry toward God asking him for victory over the enemies." When this letter reached 'Amr,
he gathered his troops and read them the letter of

[PDF p. 505]

'Omar. Then he had the messengers come, presented them to the troops, and gave the latter the order to purify
themselves and to pray in all haste, then to invoke God and ask him for victory. They did it and God accorded
them the victory.

'Amr, it is said, asked the advice of Mousallimah, adding: "For me, my advice is to fight." "I opine,"
answered Mousallimah, "that you question a competent man and that you rely on the experience of someone of
the companions of the Prophet of God; gather the men in his presence and it is he who will proclaim the
battle; that must suffice you." "But who?" asked 'Amr. Mousallimah answered: "'Abadat ben El Samet." 'Amr had
him called and when he had arrived, mounted on his horse, he wished to descend. "Before descending," said
'Amr to him, "show me the teeth of your lance." 'Abadat having shown them to him, 'Amr removed his turban from
his head, gave it to 'Abadat to whom he remitted the command of the combat against the Greeks. 'Abadat
therefore took the command, the Greeks drew back and were beaten, and, by his intermediary, God conquered
Alexandria that very day. The siege of Alexandria had lasted 9 months, since the death of Heraclius, and had
begun 5 months before the death of this prince. The town was carried the Friday, 1st day of Moharrem of the
year 21 [10 December 641]. According to Abou 'Amr El Kandi, 'Amr would have besieged Alexandria only for 3
months, after which he would have seized it by main force; it is there, adds the author, the first conquest.
However, it is claimed that 'Amr seized the town the 1st Moharrem of the year 21.

According to El Leith, cited by El Qoda'i, 'Amr besieged Alexandria for 6 months, seized it, then marched on
Fostat which he took as capital in Dhu-l qaddeh.

When God, says Ibn 'Abd El Hakem, had put the Greeks to flight and had made Alexandria be conquered by the
Muslims, the Greeks dispersed by land and by sea. 'Amr, leaving at Alexandria a thousand of his companions,
set out with the rest of his troops in pursuit of the Greeks who fled by land; those of the Greeks who had
taken the sea then returned to Alexandria and killed all they found there of Muslims; there were spared only
those who took flight. This news having reached 'Amr, he returned in all haste, retook the town, installed
himself there, and wrote to 'Omar ben El Khattab: "God has

[PDF p. 506]

made us conquer Alexandria without convention or treaty." 'Omar answered him that he detested his advice and
that he ordered him not to pass beyond Alexandria. Here, says Ibn Lahi'at, is how he conquered Alexandria for
the second time: A man named Ibn Besamat, who was a porter, questioned 'Amr on his religion, on himself, on
his country, on his people, before opening him the gate. 'Amr answered all these questions, and it is then
that, Besamat having opened the gate, 'Amr could enter. From the beginning of the siege to the taking of the
town, there were twenty-two men killed. 'Amr ben El 'As sent Moawiah ben Khadig as messenger to 'Omar ben El
Khattab, to announce to him the victory. "Do you not give me a letter?" asked Moawiah. "Why a letter?"
answered 'Amr, "is an Arab made to carry letters? have you not seen by yourself and were you not present?"

When the messenger had arrived at 'Omar's to announce to him the taking of Alexandria, 'Omar prostrated
himself and rendered glory to God. Here is what Moawiah ben Khadig recounts: "'Amr ben El 'As having sent me
to carry to 'Omar the news of the taking of Alexandria, I arrived at Medina at noon and went in all haste to
the gate of the mosque; I entered there and held myself standing, when a slave-woman coming out of the house
of 'Omar ben El Khattab perceived me out of breath and covered with my travel-garments; she approached me and
said to me: 'Who are you?' 'I am,' I answered, 'Moawiah ben Khadig, messenger of 'Amr ben El 'As.' The slave
withdrew, then returned running, and I heard the light noise of her mantle on her leg. She approached me and
said to me: 'Stand up! the emir of the believers deigns to ask for you.' I followed her, and when I entered,
'Omar held his mantle with one hand and refastened with the other his breeches. 'What do you bring?' he asked
me. 'Good news,' I answered. 'Alexandria is taken.' 'Omar came out with me, went to the mosque, and said to
the crier: 'Call everyone to prayer.' And when the people were gathered, he said to me: 'Come, recount to
your companions what has happened.' I rose and made my account. Then 'Omar set about praying, withdrew into
his oratory, and there, turned toward the qibla, absorbed himself in prayers. Then having sat down, he asked:
'Slave, is there something to eat?' The slave advanced with bread and oil. 'Eat,' he said to me, and I ate
abundantly. He said to me again: 'Eat, for the traveler has need of nourishment, and if I had to eat, I would
eat with you.' And I threw myself on the food. Then he said: 'Slave, are there dates?' And the slave brought
dates on a tray:

[PDF p. 507]

'Eat,' he said to me, and I ate avidly. 'What did you say on arriving at the mosque?' he asked me. 'I said,'
I answered, 'that the prince of the believers was making his siesta.' 'What you said or what you thought is
bad. If I sleep indeed by day, I do prejudice to my subjects; if I sleep by night, I do prejudice to myself.
How could I sleep in this alternative, O Moawiah?'"

Later, 'Amr ben El 'As wrote to 'Omar ben El Khattab: "I have conquered the town of Alexandria and will not
make you the description of it; I will tell you only that I found there four thousand constructions with four
thousand baths, forty thousand Jews whom I have struck with the capitation, and four hundred royal places of
pleasure." According to Abou Qabil, 'Amr, after having seized Alexandria, found there twelve thousand
merchants selling vegetables. And during the night when 'Amr entered the town and that when one had dreaded
his entry, seventy thousand Jews fled from Alexandria.

One counted in Alexandria, in the way of baths, twelve thousand vaults, of which the smallest enclosed a
thousand halls each able to contain a great number of persons. The number of the Greeks of Alexandria reached
two hundred thousand, the most vigorous reached the country of Roum on boats. There were there a hundred
great boats that transported thirty thousand persons and all they could carry of riches, utensils, and
servants. Those who remained had to pay the tribute, and they were to the number of six hundred thousand;
without counting the women and the children. The troops were not in agreement with 'Amr for the division;
almost all the soldiers claimed it; but 'Amr declared that he could not accord it before having referred it
to the emir of the believers. He wrote to him therefore, announcing the conquest and enumerating to him the
riches of the town, informing him that the Muslims claimed the division of them. 'Omar answered him: "Divide
nothing, touch not these riches; the taxes will be the share of the Muslims and will be to them a force
against the forces of their enemies." And 'Amr had the town repaired, enumerated the inhabitants, and imposed
on them the tribute. And all of Egypt was subjected to the tax of two dinars per man, each paying only two
dinars per head, unless he had the means to pay more because of the extent of his lands and their
cultivations. It was not thus at Alexandria, whose inhabitants paid the tribute and the capitation according
to the good pleasure of the vali, for Alexandria had been carried by

[PDF p. 508]

main force and not ceded by treaty or convention, and for the Alexandrians, there was neither peace nor
protection.

Certain districts of Egypt were treated on a war footing; the territories of Belheib, of El Kheïs, and of
Salatis were ravaged. The product of the pillage was sent to Medina and to the other towns (of Arabia), but
'Omar ben El Khattab sent it back to the pillaged districts and had it restored to them. And the totality of
the Copts became protected ones (dhimmis) of Islam.

According to Yezid ben Abou Habib, 'Amr having pillaged the districts of Belheib, of Salatis, of Qoratia, and
of Sakha and having made the division of the booty, the first fruits of it were sent to Medina, but 'Omar ben
El Khattab wrote to 'Amr to return this booty to its proprietor, and 'Amr restored what he could find again
of it. It is said in another account that 'Omar ben El Khattab wrote specially on the subject of the people
of Salatis: "Whoever of them is in your hands, be favorable to him and demonstrate to him the truth of Islam;
if he embraces Islamism, let him be considered as a Muslim; let him have part in the common wealth; but if he
prefers to conserve his religion, leave him tranquil in his town." The people of Belheib, who were then just
men, chose Islamism.

In another account, it is reported that the people of Salatis, of Sa, of Belheib aided with all their power
the enemies of the Muslims against the latter; the Muslims having vanquished them, believed it licit to
pillage them and said: "These countries will be for us a booty like Alexandria." 'Amr wrote to 'Omar ben El
Khattab on this subject and 'Omar answered him: "Make of Alexandria and of these three districts protected
ones of Islam; impose on them a tribute, and this tribute, joined to what the Copts must pay, will be for the
Muslims a force against their enemies. Let no booty be drawn from it and let them not be made slaves." And one
did thus.

It is said, on the contrary, that 'Omar brought them back to the pact concluded previously with them. 'Amr,
says Ibn Lahi'at, collected, for the capitation at Alexandria, six hundred thousand dinars, for he found there
three hundred thousand protected ones of Islam, each imposed two dinars, which gives the aforementioned
total. It is said that the product of the capitation at Alexandria was eighteen thousand dinars. Under the
caliphate of Hecham ben 'Abd El Melek, this tax produced thirty thousand dinars; and it is asserted that
'Amr ben El 'As left their lives to the Alexandrians and that, far from massacring and pillaging, he made of
them protected ones of Islam, as he had done of the Nubians.

[PDF p. 509]

CHAPTER XIV
OF WHAT THE MUSLIMS DID AT ALEXANDRIA AND THE UPRISINGS OF THE GREEKS

As for Alexandria, says Ibn 'Abd el Hakem, there was found there no terrain belonging in property to anyone,
but whoever desired to remain somewhere with his brothers could do so. After the taking of Alexandria, 'Amr
ben El 'As and 'Abadah ben El Samet went forward and mounted the hill where today is the mosque of 'Amr ben
El 'As. "Let us descend," said Moawiah ben Khadig. And 'Amr descended and established himself in a house to
the west of the oratory of 'Amr, on the side of the sea, which has since been destroyed; Moawiah established
himself on the eminence where 'Abadah ben El Samet planted a tent in which he remained during all the time
of his sojourn at Alexandria. Abou-l Derda was, it is said, with him, but God knows it better than anyone.

After the pacification of the country, 'Amr ben El 'As divided his army thus: a quarter was left in garrison
at Alexandria; another quarter occupied the shore of the sea; the rest remained under his orders. The quarter
that held garrison at Alexandria stayed there regularly during the six months of summer and was relieved
during the six months of winter. To each chief was assigned a castle where he established himself with all
those who accompanied him; they took there gratuitously their provisional lodgings.

According to Yezid ben Abou Habib, the Muslims remained at first tranquil in their cantonments at Alexandria,
but later, become impatient, they made some expeditions outside, and the one of them who returned first
occupied the house that pleased him. Having to set out again on campaign, 'Amr said to them: "I fear that you
may put in bad state the houses that served you as lodging, if you take them from one another." And, in
approaching Karioun: "Go," he said to them, "with the benediction of God, and the one of you who plants his
lance in a house, this house will belong to him, to him and to his children." And when a man entered a house,
he planted his lance in a room, then another came who planted his lance in another room, and thus the house

[PDF p. 510]

became the property of two or three families who installed themselves in it. At their departure, the Greeks
came back to take possession of their lodging and repaired it. And Yezid ben Abou Habib claims that one had
the right neither to give these houses in rental nor to take them on lease, no more than to transmit them by
inheritance; one could only inhabit them as places of cantonment.

According to the account of Yezid ben Abou Habib, 'Amr ben El 'As, after the taking of Alexandria, seeing the
houses and the edifices deserted, had the design of installing himself there. "Here," he said, "are houses
that will not cost us much trouble." He wrote therefore to 'Omar ben El Khattab to ask him for the
authorization to install himself at Alexandria. 'Omar asked the messenger if, in this case, there would be
water between him and the Muslim army. "Yes, Emir of the Believers," answered the messenger, "at the moment
of the flood of the Nile." And 'Omar wrote to 'Amr: "I do not want you to install yourself with the Muslims
in a place where the water would separate us during the winter or during the summer." And 'Amr ben El 'As
transported himself to Fostat. 'Omar wrote in the same sense to Sa'd ben Abou Ouaqâs who occupied the towns
of Cosrou (Khosrow), to his governor of Basra, and to 'Amr ben El 'As who was at Alexandria: "Do not put
water between you and me so that, if I desire to go on horseback to you, I may ride as far as you and rejoin
you by land." And Sa'd ben Abou Ouaqâs transported himself from the towns of Cosrou to El Koufa, the governor
of Basra left the town he occupied to go to Basra, and 'Amr ben El 'As went from Alexandria to Fostat. Each
year, 'Omar ben El Khattab sent a corps of troops from Medina to Alexandria, for he did not neglect the new
conquest and always dreaded a surprise attack of the Greeks.

Othman wrote to 'Abdallah ben Sa'd ben Abou Sara': "I have learned what the Emir of the Believers had
resolved on the subject of Alexandria; the Greeks having risen up twice, he was obliged to leave the
garrisons at Alexandria and to furnish provisions to these garrisons which relieved each other every six
months." At the time of an uprising of the town, the Greeks, having at their head the eunuch Manuel, arrived
in boats and blockaded it. The Greeks of Alexandria made common cause with the besiegers; only El Maqoqos
remained tranquil and did not violate the treaty. At this epoch, 'Amr ben El 'As had been deposed by Othman
and one had named as vali 'Abd Allah ben Sa'd ben El Sara'. At the arrival of the Greeks, the Alexandrians
asked Othman for the recall of 'Amr to hold his head up to the

[PDF p. 511]

Greeks, for he had the experience of war and the enemies dreaded him. Othman consented. 'Amr returned, and,
as at this epoch Alexandria was protected by walls, he swore that, if God gave him the victory, he would raze
the enclosure of the town and render Alexandria similar to a house of debauchery into which one can penetrate
from all sides. 'Amr operated several sorties against the besiegers by sea and by land, and the Copts, who
obeyed El Maqoqos, joined him; as for the Greeks, none was of the party of El Maqoqos. Kharagah ben Hazafah
having said to 'Amr: "Combat them before the number of the rebels increases and let us not leave all of Egypt
to rise up," "No," answered 'Amr, "I will on the contrary let them come to me, and as they will do prejudice
to those near whom they pass, God will make them destroy one another." And the Greeks moved away from
Alexandria, and with them all the insurgents of the provinces. They stopped in the villages, drinking the
wine, eating the provisions, and pillaging all the places through which they passed, without 'Amr attacking
them. They arrived thus at Nafious where the two armies met at once on the land and on the water; the Greeks
pushed toward the side of the Copts and made rain into the river a hail of arrows, and an arrow reached in
the heart the mare of 'Amr who was on the shore. The animal was wounded and 'Amr leaped down from his mount;
the Greeks at this moment left the river, rejoined on land the other Greeks, and launched a cloud of arrows
on the Muslims. These having yielded slightly, the Greeks charged them with so much violence that the Muslims
turned their backs; Sherik ben Sami took flight with his cavalry. The Greeks were disposed in successive
ranks, and at this moment one of the patricians arrived from the country of Roum, mounted on his horse and
covered with a gilded armor, came out of the ranks and provoked the Muslims. A man of the tribe of Zobeïd
named Houamel and surnamed Abou Madhag presented himself; and both fought a long time charging with the
lance. Then the patrician, throwing his lance, drew his sword; Houamel threw his lance in his turn and seized
likewise his sword; his courage was known and 'Amr set about crying to him: "O Abou Madhag!" and the latter
answered: "Here I am!" The armies were ranged on the two banks of the Nile, grouped in order of battle. The
two adversaries fought with the sword for an hour. Finally the patrician precipitated himself against Houamel
who threw himself likewise on him. Houamel was slender; he drew the dagger that was at his belt, or attached
to his arm, and struck with it the throat or the clavicle of the barbarian, took him

[PDF p. 512]

bodily, overturned him under himself, and despoiled him. (Some days after, Houamel died and 'Amr had his
funeral litter carried between the two columns of his funeral couch until he was buried in the Moqattam.)
Then the Muslims, redoubling in vigor, put the Greeks to rout and pursued them as far as Alexandria which God
delivered to them. The eunuch Manuel was killed and 'Amr pursued the enemies with so much fury that he
penetrated into the heart of the town. Yielding to the supplications, he ordered to cease the carnage, and at
the very place where this order had been given, he built a mosque; it is the mosque of Alexandria that bears
the name of mosque of the Clemency, in memory of the order given there by 'Amr to cease the massacre. Then
the walls of the town were razed. The people of the provinces who had remained faithful gathered and came to
find 'Amr: "We have," they said, "remained faithful to the treaties, but these brigands have passed through
our home and have carried off our goods and our livestock which are at present in your hands." 'Amr had
restored to them what they recognized as having belonged to them and after they had furnished the proof that
these objects were indeed their property. One of them however said to 'Amr: "You have conducted yourself
unjustly toward us, for you should have defended us, we who are under your protection and have not revolted.
As for those who revolted, may God remove from them the good." And 'Amr repented and said: "Would to God that
I had been in front of them when they came out of Alexandria!" This revolt of Alexandria had had for cause
the following fact: Zalma, governor of Akhna, had come to find 'Amr and had asked him: "Make known to us what
each of us must pay for the capitation." 'Amr, showing with the finger the angle of the church, answered him:
"If you give us with what to fill this edifice from the bottom to the roof, I will have nothing to claim. You
are for us only cashiers; the more you give us, the more we will be in our turn generous toward you, the less
you give us, the less great will be our generosity." The governor of Akhna, irritated, went to the country of
Roum and came back with the Greeks. God put them to rout and rendered captive the governor of Akhna who was
brought to 'Amr. "Kill him!" one cried. "No," said 'Amr, "let him be set at liberty," he said; "go and come
back again with another army." And he adorned him, crowned him, clad him in a burnous the color of purple.
Zalma then accepted the tax of the capitation. One said to him: "If you had fallen thus into the hands of the
king of the Greeks?" "If I had fallen there," he answered, "he would have had me put to death

[PDF p. 513]

saying that I caused my companions to perish." According to Abou Qabil, 'Atabah ben Abou Safian proclaimed
'Alqamah El Qatifi governor of Alexandria, and sent him 12,000 men. And 'Alqamah wrote to Moawiah ben Abou
Safian complaining that 'Atabah deceived him as well as his companions. Mo'awiah wrote to him: "I had you
accompanied by 10,000 men of Syria and 5,000 men of Medina, and at Alexandria there were already 27,000 men."
According to another account, 'Alqamah ben Yezid commanded at Alexandria with 12,000 men; and he wrote to
Mo'awiah: "It is you who designated me as your lieutenant at Alexandria, and I have with me only 12,000 men;
it is hardly that we perceive one another, so little a thing is this number." Mo'awiah answered him: "I have
dispatched you 'Abd Allah ben Moti' with 4,000 men of Medina; I have given the order to Mo'n ben Yezid El
Salmii to go to Ramleh with 4,000 auxiliaries; when, thanks to their cavalry, they will have rejoined you and
delivered you from your frights, they will remain with you." According to Ibn Lahi'ah, 'Amr would have said:
"The valiyat (governorship) of all of Egypt is worth the rest of the caliphate."

In marching on Alexandria, 'Amr ravaged the village that today bears the name of Kharabah Ouardan. One has
reported to us diverse causes of this devastation; Sa'id ben 'Afit recounted to us that 'Amr, while he was
going to Nafious to combat the Greeks, sent in the morning Ouardan to execute an order. The Greeks of
Kharabah carried him off and hid him. 'Amr inquired of him, set about searching for him, followed his traces,
and found him in one of their houses. The order was given to destroy them; and the order was executed. It is
said that all the inhabitants of Kharabah were monks and that some soldiers of the rear-guard of 'Amr having
lingered, were killed by them, while 'Amr had already reached Karioun. He stopped the army, dispatched
against them Ouardan who massacred the inhabitants and destroyed the town which until the present has
remained a heap of ruins. It is said that the people of Kharabah were people of the rope and the sack (rogues
fit for hanging). 'Amr sent into their country to take a skin full of the dust of their soil. Then he spoke
to them, but they answered nothing, and 'Amr having made them come out, had the dust in question spread under
his prayer-rug on which he sat; he called them back and spoke to them, and they consented to what he wished.
Having made them come out again, one removed the dust, and when one had called them back and addressed the
word to them, they did not [...]

[PDF p. 514]

[OF WHAT THE MUSLIMS DID AT ALEXANDRIA, continued]

answered nothing. The experience was repeated a great number of times, and 'Amr ended by saying: "This
country does not deserve that one tread it underfoot!" And he ordered the destruction of it. When God had put
the Greeks to rout, Othman manifested the intention of leaving 'Amr ben El 'As at the head of the army and of
naming 'Abdallah ben Sa'd as superintendent of the finances. "Here I am," said 'Amr, "like the one who takes
the cow by the horns while another milks it." And he refused. This conquest of 'Amr was made by main force
under the caliphate of Othman in the year 25 [28 October 645 to 16 October 646], and between this second
conquest and the first there are 4 years. El Leith says: "The first conquest was made at the beginning of the
year 22 [30 November 642 to 18 November 643] and the second in the year 25. And the army remained [engaged in
operations] for seven years after the conquest, combating the people, for one opened against them the waters
and the marshes. Then 'Abdallah ben Sa'd ben Abou Sara' ravaged Dhu'l Souari in the year 34 [22 July 654 to
10 July 655]; and, on the subject of this expedition, it is recounted that 'Abdallah ben Sa'd on arriving at
Dhu'l Souari had the half of his troops disembark under the orders of Basr ben Artha; and when they had
disembarked, a messenger came to find 'Abdallah ben Sa'd and said to him: "What you would do if the son of
Heraclius came to you with a thousand ships, do it at once." The boats of the Muslims were to the number of
200 and some. 'Abdallah ben Sa'd placed himself standing between the two masses of the army and said: "One
announces to me that the son of Heraclius comes to us with a thousand ships. Counsel me." And as no one
answered, he resumed, after a moment of silence: "Be of some use, then." And after having kept silent an
instant, he spoke to them again, but no one answered. He sat down therefore and for the third time, after
having waited some time, he said: "Come, there is nothing to be done!" Then there rose a man of Medina who
had made the holy war with 'Abdallah ben Sa'd: "O emir," he said, "God has said: 'How many times has a

[PDF p. 515]

small troop vanquished a numerous army with the help of God; God is with those who persevere'" (Koran, II,
250). And 'Abdallah said: "Embark then!" The embarkation was done, but each boat received only the half of
its effective, the other half finding itself on land under the orders of Basr. They reached the enemy and
engaged the combat with the bolts and the arrows. The son of Heraclius had remained behind; it was night, and
at the moment of the rout the night-couriers set about searching for him to carry him news. "What is being
done?" the prince asked them. "One combats," answered the runners, "with bolts and arrows." "In that case,"
he said, "the Greeks are victorious." Later, other couriers having come, he asked them: "What is being done?"
"The bolts and arrows having run short, one has thrown stones." "Then," he said, "the Greeks will be
victorious." Other couriers came: "What is being done?" "The stones having run short, one has tied the boats
together and one has fought with the sword." "The Greeks are therefore victorious," he said. In that time the
boats were attached during the combat with chains. The boat of the emir 'Abdallah finding itself tied to an
enemy boat, the latter dragged it toward the bulk of the Greek fleet. Then 'Alqamah ben Yezed El Qatifi, who
was on the boat of 'Abdallah ben Sa'd, rose, struck the chain with his sword, and cut it. 'Abdallah, later,
questioned his wife Basisah bent Hamzah ben Yeshrah, who was then with him, for foreseeing that the combat
would be hard, one had brought the women on the boats, and Basisah answered: "'Alqamah is the master of the
chain." When 'Abdallah had asked Basisah of her father, the latter had said to him: "'Alqamah has already
asked for her and I am engaged with him. If he abandons her, I accord her to you." And 'Abdallah spoke to
'Alqamah who consented to desist, and Basisah became the wife of 'Abdallah ben Sa'd. Then 'Abdallah having
left her a widow, 'Alqamah married her and left her a widow in his turn; she then married Karib ben Abrahat
and remained his wife until his death. It is recounted that in the year 35 [11 July 655 to 29 June 656] the
Greeks went to Constantine, son of Heraclius, and said to him: "Will we leave Alexandria in the hands of the
Arabs? it is our greatest town." "What would I do with you," answered the prince, "you cannot hold an hour as
soon as the Arabs appear." "Come only," they said, "and if it is necessary, we will die." Thus agreed,
Constantine

[PDF p. 516]

set out for Alexandria with a thousand ships; for long days he remained the plaything of the winds; at the
end, God raised a hurricane that drowned them all, with the exception of Constantine who was saved with his
ship and who was pushed by the wind as far as Sicily. The inhabitants of the island questioned him; he
recounted to them his adventure, and they cried: "It is done with Christendom and the Christians if the Arabs
penetrate to our home, for we will find no one to repel them." "We had set out powerful," cried Constantine,
"and behold what we have become!" One prepared him a bath, and as one approached him: "Woe to you," he cried,
"one will carry off your men and kill your king." "Why did he not drown with the others!" they cried, and
they killed him, sparing those who were with him on his ship. The place where his expedition foundered, says
Abou 'Amr El Kandi, was called Dhu'l Souari, because of the quantity and the mass of the masts of his ships.

[PDF p. 517]

CHAPTER XV
OF THE LAKE OF ALEXANDRIA

The lake of Alexandria, says Ibn Abd El Hakem, was formerly entirely planted in vines and belonged to the
wife of El Maqoqos; she drew her revenues from the wine that was paid to her as a due. And the wine became
there so abundant that it was impossible for her to occupy herself with its placement. Then she said to her
farmers: "The wine no longer makes my affair, bring me dinars." "We have none," they answered. It is then
that she made penetrate into the lake the water that drowned the vines, and this place became a lake where
one fished enormous fish. This lasted thus until the moment when the Abbasid Caliphs, having dried up the
lake and protected it by dikes, sowed it. Later, it became again a lake long a day's march and of an equal
width. The water came there from Achtoum, on the sea of Roum, and went out of it to go into a second lake
situated beyond the first, by a canal on which are the two towns of El Hadebah and of Edkou. It is a place
abundant in plantations of cucumbers and palms, all planted in the sand. Into this lake also throws itself a
canal derived from the Nile and called El Hafer, long a half-day's march and abundant in birds, fish, and
grasses. The fish of this lake sell in great quantity at Alexandria, for they are very small and have an
infinitesimal value. The water has withdrawn from this lake since [...]

[PDF p. 518]

CHAPTER XVI
OF THE CANAL OF ALEXANDRIA

It is said that it was the queen Cleopatra who made the canal of Alexandria penetrate into the town. Before,
the water did not reach there, but the queen had the canal deepened, brought it as far as into the town, and
paved its ceiling with plaques of marble, from the beginning to the end; one still finds some of them today.
Abou-l Hassan El Makhzoumi says, in his book of the Ways: As for the canal of Alexandria, from the
water-intake of the canal to the canal of Boudarah, there is nothing, but from there on, one meets Bou
Mouharag, Mehalla Benouk, Asinat, Aourin, Mehallah Farnou, Mehallah Hassan, Minieh Terad (known under the
name of El Qa'ah), the two Mehallah of Naser and of Mesrouq. As for the canal of Loqanah, one opens it after
the seventh day of Thot; the new canal is opened the 16th of Thot; the canal of Boudarah after the 7th of
Thot; the canal of Bou Yahia and those of Bou-l Sahama and of El Qahouqia have absolutely no closure; the
canal of El Sherak is opened after the 7th of Thot; the canals of Bou Khorâshah and of El Barbit which feed
Deïssou, Somkharat, Shirnoubah, Minieh Hamad, Senadah, and a part of Mahallah Mâriah, and the canal of Fishah
Balkha are opened the 12th of Thot; the custom is to open on the day of the Nourouz the canal of Bouit; the
section of Samdissah is opened the 22nd of Thot; that of Yates the 19th of Thot; when this section is closed,
one digs a canal charged with watering the southern lands of the region and that one opens on the day of the
Nourouz, and, as soon as the canal of Aflaqah has penetrated into the lands of Yates, one has the habit, as
soon as the lands situated to the south of Aflaqah have been watered, of abandoning the canal to itself, so
that it waters freely the northern region situated beyond Yates. The canal of El Qarourah is newly made; the
canal of Bafiouha is opened the 12th of Thot; the canal of Aflaqah the 10th, and that of Askanidah the 6th.

The canal Bahr Damanhour is opened from the 20th of Mesori to the 6th of Thot; it waters a part of Tamous, of
the Church of the Garden, of Qortassa, and of Damanhour.

The canal of El Qouadis serves Shoubrah el Nakhleh and Kom el Teloul; and the canals of Shoubrah el Nakhleh
are opened at the epoch when they are the [...]

[PDF p. 519]

[OF THE CANAL OF ALEXANDRIA, continued]

higher, the 1st of Thot. The canal of Bastara is opened the 15th of Mesori; the canal of Mesid is opened the
7th of Thot; the canal of Santouyah the 18th; the Bahr Damshouva the 20th of Mesori; this last furnishes the
water to Minieh Razkoun, Saft, Kardassah, Damchouya, Mehallah El Sheikh, and Masil; the canal of Damshouya is
opened the 9th of Thot; the water remains there 17 days, then one opens up to Mehallah El Sheikh el Masil;
the water remains thus 30 days, after which one closes on the side of Damshouya for 7 days; on the side of
Saft and of Minieh Zarkoun is the canal of Barsiq which was opened the 1st of Thot.

Mehallah Barsiq has no closure.

Mehallah El Keroum is opened the 8th of Thot; this canal feeds a great number of localities which are:
Mehallah el Keroum and the villages that depend on it, Denissah, Kom el Oualid, Kom El Sakhrah, Dirames, El
Safasef, and some countries that do not depend on it, such as: Talmessa, El Galmoun, which depend on Mehallah
Kil; this canal also serves the western region.

Shoubra Barlis is closed; the canal of Qafelat was opened the 8th of Thot, but no longer has a closure today;
the canal that serves Bolqater and its villages was opened the 9th of Thot, but is no longer closed today.

The canal of El Raheb has no closure; the canal of Desounes El Moqaridi waters El Halfaiah, and is opened the
8th of Thot; likewise, the canal of Marhana and of El Mala'qiah and those of Nilamah and of Bishaï and the
other canals of El Hagiga; the canal of Karioun is opened the 8th of Thot; that of El Salqoun was opened the
6th of Thot, but no longer has a closure today; the canal of Armiakh is opened the 12th of Thot; that of
Ablouq the 6th; as for the branch of Ramsis, the water-intakes of the Bahr Ramsis were closed from the
beginning of the flood until the 17th of Thot; the countries that feed (from the Bahr) from the epoch of the
closure are the provinces and the villages of Ramsis, Mehallah, Ga'far, Falishan, some domains of the Baidi,
a fraction of El Kharbatah, of Balkhous, of Boulin, of Mahallah Ouafed and El Beida, and a part of Tilas.
Then one opens the new dike of Dakdoula; the water remains thus for ten days and waters Dakdoula, Mehallah
Mo'an, Minieh Asami, a part of Seïfiah; then one cuts the dike of El Fotami, new also, and which serves a
part of Genbouyah and of Belianah of the North, of El Serra, of Abou Homar, and of El Bahout; then one cuts
the dike of Dessouhes and of Abou Dinar, and one opens the canal of Tabrinah to which

[PDF p. 520]

are fed Densal and Talmous; the water is left there 6 days to water Miniah Atiah and Salatis.

As for the Bahr Damanhour, it remains closed above Salatis until the 17th of Thot; it serves Salatis, Zahera,
a part of Tabous, of Qertassa, of Kenisset El Rheit, and Damanhour; then one cuts the new dike of Nadibah
where the waters had stopped; in this new portion of canal, the water sojourns for 8 days and feeds Nadibah,
Daqras, El 'Amiriah, El Nasreïn; then one cuts (the following dike) and the water stops above Mehallah Khafed,
Mehallah Kil, Mehallah Namir; then one cuts the new dike of Salatis where the water had stopped; it remains
open ten days to wait until the waters of the Bahr Damanhour and those of the Bahr Ramsis have mixed; then
one cuts the dike of Meloulah to serve Terougah, Arsis, El Merasi, Rhabat El Acsas, a part of Samrou and of
Mehallah Namir; and the canal remains thus open until the lowering of the waters.

As for the new canal of Tebrinah, as soon as the territory of Tebrinah has been watered, one lets its waters
go beyond Dessounes Om Dinar; then one cuts it a little below Tamous and one lets it go, during the high
waters, over the terrains of Qerâqes; the water flows passing by Qertassa and Kenisset El Rheit. At the exit
of the canal of Tebrinah, from the beginning of the flood, the water is constantly used up to the dike of
Shoubra Ousim: this canal serves Shoubra Ousim, a part of Balkous, Hafirat El Za'frani, a part of Boulin,
Mesged Rhanem, El Souaf, Kom Sherik, Minieh Moghiin, Tell el Fotami, and Mahallah Ouafed. Then one cuts the
dike of Daliga, and then are watered the terrains of a part of Kharbatah, Falichan, Boulin, El Beida, Densat,
Telbana El Abrag, Tell Baqa, El Haddin, El Yehoudiah, El Nessoum, Abou Semadah, El Hasn, Qalaouah Benou
Obeid, Toukh Dekhaiah, Dersha, Saqra, Daliga, Lamhah, Tibah; then one cuts it to water Minieh, Zeraqat El
Hagar, El Mahzoum, a part of Hiares, Afrim, Abou Semar, and Om El Derou'.

For the canal of Ibn Zeloum, also named canal of Ibn Zeloum, the water-intake at El Ta'idi remains closed and
is opened only the 10th of Thot; this canal feeds Shabour, Kenisseh Moubarek, a part of Sersiqah and of
Damoushah, Minieh Yezid, the Hod El Maseli, Hasah Salmoun, a part of Sanit, of El Ta'idi, and of Falishan;
then one cuts the following dike, and then it serves Amlit, a part of Anbaï, of

[PDF p. 521]

Kenisset 'Abd el Melek, of Armeniah, Misna, a part of Mehallah 'Obeïd, Saft Khaled, Bornamah, Shoubra Noubah,
Kiman Sheras, a part of Damshouah; the guardians remain on the dike of Saft. At the canal of Alexandria and
its derivatives are fed the people of the interior and of the Behera, and the surplus of the waters pours
itself into the defiles and the valleys; these waters are altered. As for its riparians, they belong to the
tribes of Dananah, of El Ramhanah, of the Benou Yezan, and to the Berber tribes; they cultivate the banks of
the canal and draw from them with what to pay the tax. From the east of Pelusium, on the side of Gougir and
of Faqous, to the extremity of the country served by the canal of Alexandria, there is a month's march; and
all this space remained covered with cultivations more or less dense until after the year 350 [20 February
961 to 8 February 962] of the hijra; but the greatest part of it has been destroyed.

Abou Bekr El Tartoussi, citing some old sailor who had recounted it to him, says: I was witness at Alexandria
of a fishing made in the canal and abandoned to the people; the fish let themselves be seen there in such
abundance that the children took them with cloths; then the vali interdicted this fishing and prevented the
people from taking the fish; thus it has diminished there in such a way that it is hardly that, today, one
perceives one from time to time.

Abou 'Amr El Kandi, in his book of the Masters, reports, on the authority of El Hareth ben Meskin, that the
latter was named grand cadi of Egypt, by order of the emir of the believers El Watheq Billah in the year 239,
and, citing the passages of his history, he says: "The canal of Alexandria was cleaned by him and the letter
prescribing the cleaning of it was dated the month of Rabi II of the year 245 [6 July to 3 August 859]."

The chronicler of the Toulounides says: "In Rabi I of the year 59 [12 June 853 to 1 June 854] Ahmed ben
Touloun ordered the canal of Alexandria to be dug."

The Nile, says El Masa'oudi, did not arrive as far as the territory of Alexandria before the year 332 [4
September 943 to 23 August 944]. Alexander had built the town on a canal derived from the Nile, and the
greatest part of the water of the Nile arrived there; it is thus that were watered Alexandria and the country
of Marbout, which formed an uninterrupted succession of cultivations and

[PDF p. 522]

of gardens until Barqah; and the ships, following the course of the Nile, arrived at the markets of
Alexandria; and the ceiling of this canal, in its course across the town, was paved with stone and marble;
the water ceased to penetrate there as a consequence of the obstruction of its bed, and the people, no longer
able to feed themselves from it, had to drink the water of the wells, the Nile being a day's march from the
town.

El Messihi reports that El Hakem bi amrillah Abou Mansour ben El 'Aziz consecrated, in 404 [13 July 1013 to 1
July 1014], to the deepening of the canal, a sum of 1,500 dinars; one dug it over all its course. In 662 [4
November 1263 to 23 October 1264], El Mélek El Zaher Bibars sent the emir 'Ali, commander of the bodyguard,
to clean the canal of Alexandria whose mouth, filled with mud, let arrive at Alexandria only a very feeble
quantity of water. The emir began his operations from El Ta'ïdi, founded there a mosque, and named as
inspector of the works master Te'asif, inspector of the divans. Later, in the year 664 [13 October 1265 to 1
October 1266], the sultan sent to clean this canal the emir 'Elm el din Sangar El Masouri; and, escorted by
numerous emirs and an army, he came himself to inspect the work; the emirs and the troop were employed at the
works until the sand that obstructed the canal between El Taïdi and Foumm el Khalig had disappeared; and,
pushing as far as Barenbar, he sank boats there and raised over them a construction of stones; and, his goal
attained, he returned to the citadel of the mountain. Little by little the water ceased to flow in this canal
all the length of the year; one cleaned it about two months after the arrival of the waters, and the
Alexandrians had during all the year to drink the water of the cisterns, where the water was stored until the
year 710 [31 May 1310 to 19 May 1311]. The emir Badr el din Biktoub El Khaznadari, known under the name of
emir Shekar, vali of Alexandria, went to the citadel of the mountain and demonstrated to El Mélek El Naser
Mohammed ben Qalaoun how useful it would be to dig the canal; he set forth to him what commodity it would
present first for the transport of the grains and all sorts of merchandise to Alexandria by boats, which,
while diminishing the fatigue, would increase the revenues of the divan; in the second place, for the putting
into cultivation of the terrains on the two banks of the canal, where would rise villages and

[PDF p. 523]

markets, source of considerable revenues; thirdly, for the amelioration of the lot of the people who would
cultivate their gardens and drink constantly the water of this canal. This pleased the sultan who sent the
emir Badr el din Mohammed ben Kanda'di ben El Ouaziri with Biktoub to put into execution this project; he
prescribed to all the emirs of the kingdom to send messengers charged with gathering the people of the
districts of their government to have the work executed, and he wrote to the valis of provinces to advise
them of it. In the districts one gathered about 40,000 men in 20 days, and the work began in Regeb of the
above year [24 November to 23 December 1310]; the people of each province had a portion to dig, so much so
that the length of the dug part, from the mouth of the Bahr el Nil to the district of Shanbar, measured 8,000
hakemite kassabahs, and from Shanbar to Alexandria as much. In the primitive part of the canal, the water
penetrated there from the frontier of Shanbar; one directed there the mouth of the canal, to which one gave a
depth of 6 kassabahs and a width of 8. When one had arrived at the limit of the old canal, one gave it the
same proportions as to the new part, and of the whole one made a single canal furnished with locks and
bridges. In cleaning the old canal, one found a considerable quantity of lead employed in the substructures
of the cisterns. But the sultan drew nothing of it for himself and made a gift of it to the emir Biktoub. The
pain one had in cleaning this canal was enormous, for the part nearest the river had been submerged by the
waters; the workers had to dive to remove the earth from the bottom, and thus the mass of water became
stronger. The canals derived from this principal canal multiplied to the point of exhausting it, but its
importance and its utility were no less for that; for all the length of the year the boats could navigate
there and the Alexandrians were no longer obliged to drink the water of the cisterns. One hastened to put
into cultivation the two banks of the canal, and in little time more than a hundred thousand feddans were put
into cultivation there where formerly there was only sebakh (salt marsh); more than six hundred saqiehs
(waterwheels) functioned for the irrigation of the plantations of colocasia, indigo, sesame; more than forty
villages were founded, and at Alexandria more than a thousand gardens were traced. Thanks to this canal, a
crowd of localities became prosperous and a considerable number of persons went to people the villages
established on its banks.

For what concerns him, as soon as the works were finished, the emir Biktoub hastened to have raised at his
expense a dike, for the riparians [...]

[PDF p. 524]

[OF THE CANAL OF ALEXANDRIA, continued]

at the time of the flood experienced a considerable damage, because the waters covered the terrains of sebakh
(salt marsh). He took three months to build a dike whose foundations were of stones and lead and the upper
part of stone and lime. He furnished it with three locks and raised a hostelry where the travelers could
stop; he put there overseers and assigned a revenue for its functioning. He spent there nearly sixty thousand
Egyptian dinars, without counting the stones he had brought from an old palace situated outside Alexandria,
nor the lead found in a corridor of this same underground palace which extended as far as near the sea, nor
the lead found in the canal. The water filled this canal during all the year, and that lasted until after the
year 770 [16 August 1368 to 4 August 1369]. At that moment, the water no longer penetrated there except at
the time of the flood, and the canal remained dry at the epoch of the low water. Thus most of the gardens of
Alexandria withered and disappeared; a great part of the villages established on the banks of this canal were
abandoned.

The cause of the drying-up of the canal was that the Greeks had seized Achtoum, the locality where the water
of the sea passed to go into the lake of Alexandria before its desiccation, and that the sand, accumulated by
the wind, had obstructed the mouth of the canal; moreover, the ceiling had risen. On several occasions, the
sovereigns of Egypt had had the intention of cleaning the canal, but this project remained without
realization until the reign of El Mélek El Ashraf Barsebaï, who confided this work to the emir Gerbash El
Karimi, known under the name of 'Acheq. The latter went there and gathered there all he could of people of
the region, to the number of 875. The cleaning began the 11th of Gamadi I of the year 826 [22 April 1423] and
lasted until the 11th of Sha'ban [20 July 1423], in all 90 days; the work finished, the water penetrated
again into the canal and arrived as far as Alexandria; the boats circulated there and the people were quite
joyous. The sums spent for this cleaning by the provinces were recovered from the cultivators of the domains
riparian to the canal and the proprietors of the gardens of Alexandria. And during this considerable work,
there was committed none of those turpitudes that the valis generally commit on similar occasions. The glory
is to God! And when it was finished, the emir Gerbash went to the

[PDF p. 525]

citadel of the mountain; the sultan gave him a robe of honor and, to thank him, created him grand chamberlain.
But the effects of the cleaning of the canal made themselves felt only for a little time; soon it was again
filled up by the sand, and it was no longer possible for the boats to circulate there except at the moment of
the inundation.

[PDF p. 526]

CHAPTER XVII
COLLECTION OF TRADITIONS ON ALEXANDRIA

In the year 199 [22 August 814 to 10 August 815], the war became more violent in Egypt between El Motaleb ben
'Abd allah El Khoza'ï, emir of Egypt, and 'Abd el 'Aziz ben El Ouazir El Geraoui the Rebel, of Tennis. El
Motaleb confided the government of Alexandria to Mohammed ben Habirat ben Hesham ben Khadig, and Mohammed
took as lieutenant his maternal uncle 'Omar ben 'Abd el Melek ben Mohammed ben 'Abd el Rahman ben Moawiah ben
Khadig, surnamed 'Omar ben Melâk. At the end of three months, El Motaleb deposed 'Omar and replaced him by
his brother El Fadl ben 'Abd allah ben Malek. At this epoch were found at Alexandria boats of Spaniards
(Andalusians) gone out on expedition. These ships were found there, following what had happened at Cordoba
where, in the year 182 [22 February 798 to 11 February 799], the troops that accompanied El Hakem ben Hesham
had expelled a great number of inhabitants who had taken refuge at Alexandria. The Spaniards were furious
because a butcher of Alexandria had thrown in the face of one of them the tripes of animals, a thing for
which they had repugnance, and it is then that there happened what happened; this had taken place at the
moment when they had come to the place of Alexandria to buy what they had need of. For a long time it had
been thus, the emirs not permitting them to enter the town; but the Alexandrians went out and went to traffic
with them. When 'Omar ben Melâk was deposed, 'Abd el 'Aziz El Geraoui wrote to him, urging him to throw
himself on Alexandria and to call him there. 'Omar ben Melâk sent the Spaniards a messenger to invite them to
rise up with him and to chase El Fadl from the town. They joined therefore 'Omar, El Fadl was chased, and one
called El Geraoui; but the Alexandrians threw themselves on the Spaniards, chased them, and delivered El
Fadl. A certain number of the Spaniards were killed, the rest took flight toward the ships. El Motaleb
deposed his brother and installed as vali Ishaq ben Abrahat ben El Sabah, in the month of Ramadan of the year
199 [15 April to 14 May 815]; then replaced him by Abou Zakr ben Genadah el Mo'aferi. And when the war broke
out

[PDF p. 527]

between El Seri ben El Hakem and El Motaleb ben 'Abd allah and El Seri had seized Egypt, 'Omar ben Melâk threw
himself on Abou Zakr, chased him from Alexandria, and called El Geraoui. The Spaniards joined him, but as they
devastated everything, he ordered them to reintegrate their ships, which irritated them. There had appeared
in Alexandria a sect that one named the Soufis, preaching the good and braving the orders of the king. They
had at their head one of them named Abou 'Abd el Rahman El Soufi; these people went hand in hand with the
Spaniards and had asked the assistance of the Lakhm, the most powerful tribe of all the region of Alexandria.
Abou 'Abd el Rahman El Soufi was summoned before 'Omar ben Melâk, on the subject of a woman. He was condemned
and, full of anger, went to the Spaniards, formed an alliance with them and with the Lakhm, the Spaniards
hoping to draw vengeance on 'Omar ben Melâk. To the number of 10,000, they went against him and besieged him
in his palace; 'Omar, not believing himself in safety there and fearing that the enemies might penetrate by
main force as far as him and seize his women, had himself washed, rubbed with aromatics, and clothed in a
shroud, then he ordered his servants to make him descend toward the Spaniards; one made him descend, but the
enemies received him with sword-blows and killed him. The valiyat then passed to his brother Mohammed ben
'Abd Allah, surnamed Gious, who was killed, he too; in his place was named vali of Alexandria, 'Abd Allah El
Battal ben Abd el Ouahed ben Mohammed ben 'Abd El Rahman ben Mo'awiah ben Khadig; he was killed and replaced
by his brother Abou Habirah El Hareth who was killed; in his place was named Khadig ben 'Abd El Ouahed; he was
killed and the revolt ceased. This happened in Dhu'l Qa'dah [13 June to 12 July 815]. At this moment was
broken the alliance formed between the Lakhm and the Spaniards at the time of the murder of Ibn Melâk. The
war broke out between them: the Lakhm were put to rout and the Spaniards, having made themselves masters of
Alexandria, in the month of Dhu'l Higga, named as vali Abou 'Abd el Rahman El Soufi. Then the pillage, the
rapine, and the murder reached unheard-of proportions. Then the Spaniards, having deposed Abd El Rahman,
named as vali one of them whom one called El Kenani. The Benou Modalleg made war on the Spaniards who,
victorious, chased them from the country, and the Benou Modalleg could not return to Alexandria until El Seri
had asked the Spaniards for the authorization to recall them. The authorization was accorded and they
returned.

[PDF p. 528]

"I," said Abou Qabil, "would fear much more for Alexandria than for the Greeks if I saw come some forty ships
mounted by sailors who would be Muslims only in name and who would come at the end of summer." "What could
forty boats do against such a quantity of people, even were these boats sparkling fires?" "Be silent,
wretches that you are," he cried; "from these boats and those who would mount them would come the ruin of
Alexandria and the surroundings." The news of the death of Ibn Melâk having reached El Geraoui, he set out
with fifty thousand men, established himself before the citadel of Alexandria, and made the siege of it until
its inhabitants were at the end of their forces. But, having learned that El Sari ben El Hakem had sent an
army to Tennis, he returned on his steps, in Moharrem of the year 201 [30 July to 28 August 816]. The
Spaniards called El Sari to their rescue; and, the Egyptians having dismissed El Mamoun to call on Ibrahim
ben El Mahdi, El Geraoui marched against Alexandria, blockaded the Spaniards, and ended by entering the town
without striking a blow, by treaty, and the inhabitants prayed in his name. Then, marching on Fostat, he
combated El Sari, killed his son, and withdrew. The Spaniards, in concert with the governor named by El
Geraoui, chased and deposed the latter and called on El Seri. El Geraoui marched against them in the month of
Ramadan of the year 203 [2 to 31 March 819]. At Sakha, the Copts, to the number of two hundred thousand and
supported by the Benou Modalleg, attempted to resist him; El Geraoui put them to flight and sent back his
army to Alexandria of which it made the siege. At this moment, wars broke out between El Sari and the
inhabitants of the Said. Geraoui went therefore for the fourth time to Alexandria, besieged it, and set up
machines of war. This lasted seven months, from the 1st of Sha'ban of the year 204 [21 January 820] to the
end of the month of Safar of the year 205 [14 August 820]. El Geraoui, struck by a splinter of stone launched
by a machine, died the last day of Safar of the year 205. His son Ali succeeded him. The troubles caused at
Alexandria by the Spaniards ceased only at the arrival in Egypt of Abd allah ben Taher, sent by the emir of
the believers El Mamoun. He expelled from Egypt Obeid allah ben El Sari and went to Alexandria with the
non-Muslim chiefs of the Khorassan at the beginning of Safar of the year 212 [2 May 827]; he besieged [...]

[PDF p. 529]

[COLLECTION OF TRADITIONS ON ALEXANDRIA, continued]

the town for more than ten nights; the inhabitants came to ask the aman (safe-conduct). He made peace with
the Spaniards and agreed with them that they would leave Alexandria and would withdraw where they wished, on
condition that they would not take on their ships anyone of Egypt, neither slave nor free man. If they did
it, it would be permitted him to kill them and break the pact. When they had departed, Ibn Taher sent someone
to inspect their ships and one found there a quantity of people whom the treaty forbade them to take. The
order was given to burn their ships, but they supplicated and promised to execute the conventions. One
accorded them pardon, and they departed for the island of Crete and seized it under the conduct of the emir
Abou Hafs 'Omar ben 'Eïssa. After him, his son took the government of the island which the Spaniards occupied
until the year 345 [19 April 956 to 3 April 957], epoch when the Greeks attacked it and seized it after a
long siege. Ibn Taher named as vali of Alexandria Elias ben Ased ben Saman and returned to Fostat in Gemadi
II, then left for Iraq; and when the revolt of the Delta broke out in Gemadi I of the year 216 [16 June to 15
July 831], El Afshin combated the insurgents in agreement with Eïsi ben Mansour El Rafeqi, emir of Egypt.
'Abd Allah ben Yezid ben Mezid El Shibani was sent into the Gharbieh, but he was put to rout and pursued as
far as Alexandria where the Benou Modalleg, gathered against him, besieged him in Shawal. El Afshin entered
into campaign and, by a rapid march, went on Alexandria with his army. He met a party of the Benou Modalleg,
put them twice to rout, made them prisoners, killed them people, and entered into Alexandria the
next-to-last day of Dhu'l Higga [5 February 832]. The governor of the town fled; this chief was Mo'awiah ben
'Abd el Ouahed ben Mohammed ben Abd El Rahman ben Mo'awiah ben Khadig. El Afshin arranged the affairs of
Hashem, then marched against the people of Bashroud who held their heads up to him until the arrival of Al
Mamoun in Egypt. The latter went to El Bashroud where El Afshin had attacked the Copts, as is reported above.

When Ibrahim ben Ahmed ben Mohammed ben El Aghlab was vali of Ifriqiah in the year 261 [16 October 874 to 5
October 875], his conduct was very beautiful; the caravans and the merchants

[PDF p. 530]

traveled in all confidence on the roads. He built fortresses and watchtowers on the shore of the sea, in so
great a number that Ceuta and Alexandria were connected by a line of fires and that the news was transmitted
in a single night from one town to the other.

In Moharrem of the year 302 [27 July to 25 August 914], Habassat entered Alexandria with the army of Ifriqiah
comprising 100,000 men and more; but an army of rescue having been sent from the Orient by El Tekin, emir of
Egypt, Habassat abandoned Alexandria. A military proclamation was made at Fostat the 20th of Gemadi II [10
January 915]; no one remained behind nor abstained from going to Ghizeh, except those who could not, either
by cause of sickness or for any other valid cause. Habassat having advanced against them, they went to meet
him and put him to flight; but Habassat turned them, killed nearly 10,000 men of the Egyptians, and departed
again for Ifriqiah leaving Egypt filled with troubles. In Ramadan [20 March to 18 April 915], the slave
Mounas arrived from Iraq with a numerous army, chased El Tekin in Dhu'l Qa'dah [18 May to 16 June 915], named
as vali Deka the One-Eyed, in Safar of the year 303 [16 August to 13 September 915]; then marched with his
troops on Alexandria, having pursued and imprisoned whoever, by letter, qualified him as lord of Africa; a
great number even were killed, and the people of Libya and of Maraqiah made their appearance at Alexandria in
Shawal of the year 304 [28 March to 25 April 917], fleeing for fear of the master of Barca.

In the year 307 [3 June 919 to 22 May 926], the vanguard of El Mahdi 'Obeïd Allah, commanded by his son
Abou-l Qassem, arrived from Ifriqiah into Libya, put to flight the Alexandrians, and the Libyans abandoned
the town. Mozaffar, son of Deka the One-Eyed, came out of it with his troops, and the army of Abou-l Qassem
entered there the Friday 22nd of Safar [24 July 919]. The people of the militia fled from Fostat into Syria.
Deka, emir of Egypt, went to Ghizeh, camped there, then fell ill and died on his camp bed, at Ghizeh in Rabi'
I [1 to 26 April 919]. After him, Takin was named vali for the second time by El Moqtader; he installed
himself at Ghizeh. The ships

[PDF p. 531]

of the sovereign of Ifriqiah advanced toward Alexandria, commanded by the slave Soliman; the fleet of Tarsus,
having at its head the slave Thamal, arrived in its turn, and the two fleets met near Rosetta, in the month
of Shawal, and gave each other battle. God raised a wind that pushed back the fleet of Soliman toward the
shore where the greatest part of its ships was broken and their contents removed by main force; the crews
were for the most part massacred, the rest led away in captivity to Fostat; one killed them thus nearly seven
hundred men. Abou-l Qassem ben El Mahdi went from Alexandria to the Fayoum, seized the island of Ashmounein
and the Fayoum, and repelled from it the Egyptian army. Thamal the slave arrived with his boats at
Alexandria; the soldiers of Ifriqiah who were there attempted to repel him, but they were vanquished and the
Alexandrians fell back on Rosetta. Thamal reached Fostat and, with his boats, went to Illahoun, where he was
rejoined by the army, and with it penetrated into the Fayoum, in Safar of the year 307 [3 to 31 July 919];
Abou-l Qassem ben El Mahdi, who had marched on Barca, returned to Fostat without having delivered battle.
Alexandria and its territory remained thus in continual troubles until the time when appeared the army of El
Mo'ezz li din Allah, commanded by the general Gouher (Jawhar), in the year 358 [25 November 968 to 13
November 969]; this army seized the town and maintained itself there until the time when appeared Nezar ben
El Mostanser. What the latter did is reported in the chapter that treats of the magazines of the palace.

In the year 612 [2 May 1215 to 19 April 1216], three thousand Frankish merchants gathered at Alexandria and a
warship presented itself in the port carrying two Frankish kings come with the intention of assailing and
combating the inhabitants and seizing the country. But El Malek El 'Adel Abou Bekr ben Ayoub marched on
Alexandria, had arrested the merchants of whom we have spoken and the people of the ship, removed what they
possessed of precious, imprisoned them, and imprisoned also the two kings; at the end of a certain time, the
sultan gave back the liberty to the captives and to their wives and returned to Cairo.

In the year 554 [23 January 1159 to 11 January 1160], El Melek El Saleh Talah' ben Rozik built, to protect
Belbeis, a citadel of bricks.

In the year 562 [21 December 1166 to 9 December 1167], took place the collision of El Babein between the
vizier Shaour and Ased

[PDF p. 532]

el din Shirkaouah (Shirkuh); the troops of Shirkaouah were put to flight and a part passed to Alexandria;
then, fate favored Shirkaouah against Shaour who took flight toward Cairo; Shirkaouah having gone to
Alexandria, the garrison commanded by Negm el din Mohammed ben Mousal, vali of the frontier, the Cadi El
Achraf ben El Khebab, his intendant the Cadi El Rashid ben El Zobeid came to meet him, saluted him, and
delivered him the town. He left it to go into the Said, leaving his nephew Salah el din Youssef ben Ayoub
(Saladin) as lieutenant charged with the frontier post with a thousand cavaliers. Shaour came to attack him,
seconded by Mori (Amaury), king of the Franks; but the entire population marched with Salah el din and
delivered to Shaour innumerable combats. The latter had managed to gather 24,000 cavaliers. Moreover, he
promised the people to lighten the taxes and the laws and to abandon to them the fifth of the booty if they
delivered him Salah el din. They refused and claimed the combat. Then Shaour rendered the siege more pressing
and the victuals became rare among the besieged. But Shirkaouah, having gathered a considerable troop of
Bedouins, arrived to their rescue. Shaour sent to him a messenger charged with offering him five thousand
dinars if he wished to return to Syria. Shirkaouah accepted, the town was opened, and Salah el din went to
Mori, the king of the Franks, and remained with him. Shaour gave no respite to the Frankish king, that he
deliver him Salah el din. But far from consenting to it, Mori sent him back to his uncle Shirkaouah; Salah el
din, as well as all those who were with him, went first by sea to Acre to rejoin his uncle, and from there to
Damascus. Shaour entered Alexandria the 17th of Shawal [29 September 1162]. Ibn Mousal hid himself, then fled
into Syria; but, Shaour having seized Ibn el Khebab, he held him prisoner until his people had bought him
back for an enormous ransom; he could do nothing against Ibn el Zobeïd, and marched against Rosetta. The
fiqih Abou-l Taher ben 'Ouf and a great number of the inhabitants had fortified themselves in the Pharos.
Shaour occupied himself with their affair and Ibn 'Ouf said to him: "Grant our prayer, O emir of the army,
and pardon us what we have done." He pardoned them. He named as intendant of the Treasury the Cadi El Ashraf
Abou-l Qassem Abd el Rahman ben Mansour ben Naga; then he left for Cairo, accompanied by Mori, the king of
the Franks who, subsequently, returned to his country.

In the year 671 [29 July 1272 to 17 July 1273], arrived the news that the Franks were preparing an expedition

[PDF p. 533]

against the littoral of Egypt. El Melek El Zaher Beibars had the galleasses prepared and planted on the walls
of Alexandria about a hundred machines.

The Thursday 5th of the month of Rageb of the year 727 [5 Rageb 727 = 27 May 1327], a Frankish merchant having
gone to the sea-gate where a popular feast was being held, took up a dispute there with a young beardless boy
whose complaisance he was claiming. A Muslim who was there took the thing badly and said: "That is not
licit." The Frank, removing his shoe, struck with it the face of the Muslim who called for help. One ran up,
the Franks took the side of their companion; the melee became general and the military commander had to mount
his horse, close the gates of the town, and set about searching for the instigators of the brawl; these
having taken flight, the commander returned to his palace and had the gates of the town kept closed. There
was thus outside the town a considerable number of persons whose affairs claimed them and who had to pass the
whole night outside their homes, howling and crying near the gates. The guardians went to the commander and
insisted that the gates be opened. One ended by opening them and all precipitated themselves to enter,
jostling and pushing one another, so much so that more than ten persons died there, that there was a crowd of
broken limbs, a number of turbans, handkerchiefs, and other objects lost, and weeping and cries during all
the night. Thus when, the morning come, the vali wished to go on horseback to make account of the situation,
he was thrown down from his horse and one launched stones at him; he attempted to escape and regained his
castle; one pursued him there and assailed him; he answered from the top of his castle and there were floods
of blood spilled. The rebels set fire to the gate of the castle and pillaged the neighboring houses. The vali
had to write to ask the assistance of the vali of Damanhour and of the Bedouins of the vicinity. These
arrived, surrounded the town, and sent by pigeons to the sultan the news that the Alexandrians had revolted.
The sultan entered into a violent anger, for he feared that the populace might set at liberty the imprisoned
emirs. He had the Cadis come and, having gathered them, asked them what should be done regarding this
struggle, and they wrote: "What is fitting." And the vizier Mogholtay El Gemali, Toughan Shah El Dawawin,
Aïdmer, commander of the bodyguards, and a great number of royal mamelukes, departed with the intendant of
the private Treasury. The vizier was bearer [...]

[PDF p. 534]

[COLLECTION OF TRADITIONS ON ALEXANDRIA, continued]

of a note ordering to put to death the corrupt people and instigators of quarrels; to seize the goods of the
people of the country, to seize the arms which served only to multiply the brawls, to make sure of the Cadi
and the clerks, and to transport the imprisoned emirs to Cairo. All departed therefore in all haste and
reached in 3 days Alexandria. The vizier stopped at El Kheis, on whose inhabitants he struck a contribution
of 500,000 Egyptian dinars; he had put in irons the Cadi of the Cadis, 'Amad el din, and his clerk; for one
found it bad that both had proclaimed the holy war in the country; but both denied having provoked these
incidents, alleging that it was not in their power to bring back to duty a crowd so considerable. The clerk
Ibn El Shibi was struck with terrible blows and constrained to pay 600,000 dirhems; the cadi had to pay
500,000. One wished to have him hanged, but in the letter he wrote to the sultan, he showed himself so humble,
asking for pardon and absolution, that the sultan pardoned him and pursued the populace. Thirty rebels were
sawed in two the Friday 13th [13 Rageb 727 = 4 June 1327]. The population, filled with terror, regained its
lodging; numerous turbans flew off and for twenty days, the terror only increased. The sultan sent an order
to punish the rebels and confiscate their goods. The vizier showed himself devoted in his response, and
having prepared the imprisoned emirs, he left in his turn the frontier post, after having asked the
surrender of the arms that were there; he gathered thus six thousand complete equipments which he put all in
a hall on which he affixed the seals. He collected also from the population more than 260,000 dinars. This
was one of the most painful trials and one of the most deplorable events. To God belongs what has preceded
and what must follow.

[PDF p. 535]

CHAPTER XVIII
OF THE TOWN OF ATRIB

This town was built by Atrib ben Qobtim ben Maiz ben Beïsar, son of Cham, son of Noah. "After the death of
his father Qobtim," says Ibn Ouacif Shah, "Atrib withdrew into his province -- that is, into the town his
father had constructed for him. It was twelve miles long and possessed twelve gates. He placed in its
principal street three cupolas raised on columns, one above the other. Of these cupolas, one was at the
center and the two others at the two extremities of the town. Each cupola was surmounted by a great
watchtower. In each quarter was a circus, places where one could sit, places of pleasure exposed to the
Orient. To the west of the town, he dug a canal on which he threw bridges bearing uninterrupted seats; round
about were habitations bathed by the canal and communicating by bridges with gardens full of vegetation,
beyond which extended orchards and flowerbeds. Each of the gates was endowed with a marvel; statues, images
that moved, talismans defending the approach of the gate. At the entrance of each of the gates, and on each
side of the gate, was raised the image of a demon made of copper; if some man of good approached it, the
statue of the right laughed aloud, while the demon of the left wept if some dishonest man approached it. In
each of the places of pleasure, he gathered what was found of most beautiful in the way of tamed animals and
singing birds. On the cupolas of the town, he placed a statue that whistled when the wind blew, and raised a
mirror in which one saw the distant countries. Facing it, to the Orient, he constructed a town where he
established circuses and, on the exterior, raised statues of different aspects; in the middle was placed a
basin such that if a bird passed near it, it fell in and could not come out, so much so that one could take
it. He furnished this town with a citadel of twelve gates, on each of which was a statue that did marvelous
things. All around were planted gardens, and in the vicinity, on the side of the East, was built a belvedere
raised on eight pillars and surmounted by a cupola on which was a bird with deployed wings that whistled
three times a day: in the morning, at noon, and at the setting of the sun. In the interior were

[PDF p. 536]

raised statues and numerous marvels. This king constructed numerous towns and installed there a man named
Borsan, who occupied himself with chemistry and struck there dinars weighing each seven metsqals and bearing
his cipher. Atrib reigned 360 years and reached the age of 500 years; one made him a naos in the eastern
mountain; one dug there an underground passage plated with glass and marble, and the body was deposited on a
bed of gold incrusted (with precious stones); near him, one deposited his treasures and one put on the door
the image of a dragon that no one could approach without perishing. One threw over it sand and one inscribed
on the tomb his name and the epoch of his life."

There are in Egypt, says Ibn El Kandi, four regions that have not their like on the surface of the earth, nor
under the sky: the region of the Fayoum, the region of Atrib, the region of Samanoud, and the region of
Antinoe. The region of Atrib forms part of the ensemble of the regions of the Delta and comprises 108
villages. The towns of the magicians were, it is said, in Egypt, to the number of seven: Erment, Beba,
Bousir, Antinoe, San, Atrib, and Sa.

[PDF p. 537]

CHAPTER XIX
OF THE TOWN OF TENNIS

Tennis is a locality of Egypt, situated in the middle of the water; it forms part of the region of the Khalig
and takes its name from Tennis, son of Cham, son of Noah. It is said that it was built by Qlimoun, of the
lineage of Atrib ben Qobtim, one of the ancient kings of the Copts.

After Atrib, says Ibn Ouacif Shah, reigned his daughter who administered and directed the kingdom wisely and
guided it with energy and vigor for 35 years, after which she died, leaving the government to the son of her
sister, Qlimoun; the latter gave back to the viziers their prerogatives, reintegrated in their ranks the
priests whose advice directed every thing. He rendered the country more prosperous and sought with ardor the
science.

In his time was built the first Tennis which the sea submerged, although it was primitively at a great
distance from it and the town was surrounded by cultivations, plantations of trees and vines, villages,
wine-presses, and a territory more prosperous than any other. In the middle of the region, the king had had
raised a belvedere surmounted by cupolas and decorated with the most beautiful ornaments and the most
beautiful engravings; he had had it hung with hangings and skillfully arranged. As soon as the Nile began to
rise, the king went to this town, installed himself there until the Nourouz, then returned. The king had had
the idea of distributing the waters and giving to each village its part. There was, in these villages, a
citadel surrounded by bridges, and each king came there and worked to render it prosperous and to improve
it; all made of it their place of pleasure.

It is said that the two gardens of which God speaks in his sublime book, when he says: "Propose to them the
example of these two men: to one, we have given two gardens planted with vines that we have surrounded with
palms, etc." (Koran, XVIII, 31); it is said that these two gardens were those of two brothers of the royal
house, between whom was divided this region and who regulated admirably its culture, its industry, and its
construction; the king

[PDF p. 538]

came to divert himself in these two gardens which produced the most beautiful fruits and vegetables, of which
one made the most delicious dishes and drinks. One of the two brothers, hospitable and charitable, marveled
at this place, gave his part by way of beneficence; the other, egoistic and avaricious, seeing his brother
give all his goods, mocked him, and each time the first wished to sell something, the second bought it from
him, so much so that the first came to possess nothing more and the garden became the property of his brother
of whom he was obliged to ask alms. But the avaricious one repelled him and chased him, reproaching him for
his prodigality. "I had," he said, "advised you to keep what you had and you did not do it; my avarice
profited from it, and I have become richer than you, my children are also more numerous." And he turned away
from his brother, happy to be the master of so much riches and of so beautiful a garden. But God gave an
order to the sea which submerged the region and drowned it entirely; and the proprietor set about lamenting
and groaning over his ruin, saying: "Would to God that I had associated no one with my Lord! For God has
said: There is no troop so small that it cannot be victorious with the help of God!"

In the time of the king Qlimoun was built the town of Damietta; Qlimoun reigned 90 years and constructed
himself a naos in the eastern mountain; he disposed all around treasures, precious stones, and all sorts of
precious things; at the entrance, he placed statues that turned by means of mechanisms, and that held in hand
swords with which they pierced whoever wished to enter. To the right and to the left, he placed two lions of
gilded copper furnished with a mechanism and that tore those who approached. On the naos one engraved these
words: "This is the tomb of Qlimoun ben Atrib ben Qobtim ben Masr, who lived long days. When death came to
find him, he could not repel it. Let whoever will come to him remove nothing of what is his, but let him take
what is near him."

It is said that Tennis was the brother of Doumiat (Damietta), and El Masa'oudi, in his book of the Prairies
of Gold, and other authors report that Tennis was a land that had not its like in Egypt; the climate there
was temperate, the soil excellent, the gardens, the palms, the vines, the trees, the fields abounded there,
canals watered there the high lands, and no one had seen a country more beautiful than this region, nor where
the gardens and the vines were as continuous; and, in Egypt, there was no canton that resembled it,

[PDF p. 539]

[OF THE TOWN OF TENNIS, continued]

except the Fayoum. The water arrived there without interruption summer and winter, and the inhabitants
watered, when it pleased them, their gardens and their cultivations. All the water then threw itself into the
sea, both by its own canals and by the place called El Ashtoum. Between the sea and this region, there was
the distance of a day's march.

Between El 'Arish and the island of Cyprus, there was formerly a road that led to Cyprus and where the beasts
walked dry-shod; and between El 'Arish and Cyprus, there was only a small space of sea, until the moment when
the water submerged the road that connected El 'Arish to Cyprus. 251 years after Diocletian, the water of the
sea covered a part of the places that today bear the name of lake of Tennis and submerged them; and the
invasion increased each year, so much so that the waters ended by entirely covering this lake. All the
villages situated in the low part of the region were submerged, while of those situated on the high terrains,
there remained Tounah, Boura, and others still that exist even at present, and are surrounded by the waters.
The inhabitants of the villages situated in this lake transport their dead to Tennis, and there one has been
able to disinter them after the others. The total inundation of the region was accomplished a hundred years
before the conquest of Egypt. A king who resided at Farma had wars to sustain with one of the governors of
Baliana and the surrounding places; to defend one against the other, they dug ditches and opened canals going
from the Nile to the sea; thus the water, forced to escape from the Nile, extended itself and covered this
region.

Masa'oudi, in his book "Chronicle of the Time," recounts that Tennis was a considerable town furnished with a
hundred gates. According to Ibn Batlan, Tennis is a small country situated in an island in the middle of the
sea, at five degrees to the south of the middle of the fourth climate; the land of it is salty and the air
very variable. The inhabitants drink water stored in cisterns that one fills each year at the moment when the
waters of the lake become sweeter, thanks to the arrival of the waters of the Nile. All the town has need of
is brought by boats: the inhabitants there feed themselves above all on fish, cheese, and cow's milk; indeed,
the farm of the sultani cheese brings 700 dinars, each thousand cheese-molds bringing a dinar and a half. The
farm of the fish produces 10,000 dinars. The character of the inhabitants is gentle and easy; their nature is
inclined to indolence and to softness. The physician Abou-l Seri reports that there were born there each year
two hundred hermaphrodite (?) children who loved cleanliness, gentleness, song, and voluptuousness, and most
of them passed the nights in drunkenness and took very little exercise, because of the smallness of the
country; thus their bodies were filled with corrupt matters. In this town appeared a malady named the hiccup
of Tennis, which raged for thirty years on the inhabitants.

[PDF p. 540]

The author of the history of Damietta recounts that Tennis was governed by Abou Thour, a Christian Arab;
after the conquest of Damietta, the Muslims marched on Tennis; an army of 20,000 men composed of Christian
Arabs, Copts, and Greeks went to meet them. The war lasted until the moment when Abou Thour fell into the
hands of the Muslims and his army was put to rout. The Muslims entered into the town, converted the church
into a mosque, divided the booty, and left for Farma. And Tennis did not cease to belong to the Muslims until
Bechr ben Safouan El Kelbi took, in the name of Yezid ben 'Abd el Melek, the government of Egypt, in the
month of Ramadan of the year 101 [16 March to 14 April 720]. At this epoch, the Greeks descended at Tennis,
killed Mozahem ben Mosallimah El Mouradi, governor of the town, and a great number of notables. It is
regarding them that the poet said:

[verses:] Were you not struck and edified when men recounted to you the misfortunes befallen the lords of
Tennis?

Tennis was a great town, in which were a great number of monuments of the Ancients; the inhabitants of it
were rich and opulent. The greatest number were weavers; and at Tennis, one wove robes of linen such as one
made nowhere else; one executed there for the caliph a robe named el badnah in which entered of thread only
two oques, for the weft and the warp, the rest of the stuff being of gold; the whole was of a perfect work
and had no need to be cut or sewn; the value of this robe reached a thousand dinars. There was nowhere in the
world a loom where was executed a robe of simple linen without gold, elsewhere than at Tennis and at
Damietta. When one let free course to the Nile, the people who inhabited to the east of Farmah, in the
regions of Gergir and of Faqous, could feed themselves there by the canal of Tennis. Tennis was one of the
towns

[PDF p. 541]

most considerable of Egypt. At Sheta, Difou, Damirah, Tounah, and in the neighboring islands, one fabricated
light tissues, but which remained well below those of Tennis and of Damietta. The exportation of these stuffs
into Iraq produced per year, until after the year 360 [4 November 970 to 23 October 971], from twenty
thousand to thirty thousand dinars. When the vizier Ya'qoub ben Keles was named intendant of the finances, he
made this industry disappear by his vexations. The inhabitants of Tennis and of Damietta were Christians
submitted to the protection. The people of the country took with nets, at the door of their houses, the
quails and other birds; the semani is a bird that comes from the sea and falls into these nets. The boats
went from Tennis to Farma, following the shore of the sea.

At the death of Haroun El Rashid, his son Mohammed El Amin succeeded him and wished to act treacherously and
perfidiously toward El Mamoun. Egypt had for governor Hatem ben Harthemah ben A'ïn who administered in the
name of El Amin. The people of the Tenou and of Nama having revolted against him, he sent against them El
Seri ben El Hâkem and 'Abd El 'Aziz ben El Ouazir El Geraouï who were victorious after the 8th of Shawal of
the year 194 [15 July 810]. Then the emir Gaber ben El Ash'ath El Tayi was named governor and Hatem ben
Harthamah was destituted. Gaber was a gentle man. In that time, the relations grew tense between Mohammed El
Amin and his brother Abdallah El Mamoun. Mohammed despoiled his brother of the Empire to which he had right,
had his name suppressed in the prayers pronounced from the pulpit, and replaced it by that of his son Mousa
to whom he gave the surname of El Shedid, name under which the prayers were recited. The troops of Egypt who
held for El Mamoun came to an understanding in order to dispossess Mohammed. Gaber sent a messenger to turn
them away from this project and to frighten them on the disastrous results their mutiny would have. But El
Seri ben El Hakem arrived inciting the people to overthrow Mohammed. El Seri was one of those who had come to
Egypt in the time of El Rashid with the army of El Leith ben El Fadl; he was an obscure man who made himself
celebrated by the ardor he put into overthrowing Mohammed El Amin.

El Mamoun wrote to the notables of Egypt to engage them to rise up in his favor; they consented to it,
proclaimed El Mamoun caliph, in Rageb

[PDF p. 542]

of the year 196 [18 March to 16 April 812], and went against Gaber, expelled him, and named as vali 'Abad ben
Mohammed. Mohammed El Amin, instructed of these facts, wrote to the principal chiefs of the Hauf to announce
to them the nomination to the post of vali of Rabi'ah ben Qeis El Garshy, chief of the Qeïssites of the Hauf.
All the inhabitants of the Hauf, Yemenites and Qeïssites, embraced his cause, united themselves openly to
Amin, and rejected El Mamoun; they went to Fostat to combat there the inhabitants; after two combats, they
departed again, then returned on several occasions to deliver battle. 'Abad ben Mohammed sent 'Abd El Aziz El
Geraouï with an army destined to combat the rebels at their home. 'Abd El 'Aziz set out, in Dhu'l Qa'dah of
the year 197 [4 July to 2 August 813], and engaged the combat at 'Aïrit. But El Geraouï, put to rout,
withdrew to Faqous with his troops of Arabs of Lakhm and of Godam. His soldiers said to him: "Why are you not
of your own party; certainly you are worth as much as those who are masters of the country." And with them he
passed to Tennis, established himself there, and sent employees to collect the tax of the Delta; but Rabi'ah
ben Qeïs sent in his turn people charged with preventing the collection. The inhabitants of the Hauf went, in
Moharrem of the year 198 [1 to 30 September 813], to Fostat where they delivered a combat in which perished a
great number of soldiers of the two armies. The news of the death of El Amin having reached the people of the
Hauf, they dispersed. El Mamoun named as emir of Egypt Motaleb ben 'Abd Allah El Khoza'i, who came to take
possession of his post in Rabi' I [30 October to 28 November 813], and confided the command of the guard to
'Abd el 'Aziz El Geraouï; later, he deposed him and charged him with a military expedition in the Delta. Then
El Motaleb having been destituted was replaced by El 'Abbas ben Mousa ben 'Eïsi, in Shawal [25 May to 22 June
814]; El 'Abbas recalled 'Abd el Aziz to the command of the guard. When the troops, again revolted, had
recalled El Motaleb, in Moharrem of the year 197 [22 August to 20 September 814], El Geraouï fled to Tennis;
El 'Abbas ben Mousa ben 'Eïsi set out from Mecca for the Hauf, camped at Balbeïs, and asked the assistance of
the Qeïssites; then he went to Tennis to El Geraouï who gave him the counsel to install himself on the
territory of the Qeïssites; he returned therefore to Balbeïs in Gemadi II [17 January to 14 February 815] and
died there,

[PDF p. 543]

poisoned in a dish that El Motaleb had prepared for him by the Qeïssites. The inhabitants of the Haufs then
submitted to El Motaleb and proclaimed him their master; they hastened to go to the well of 'Amirah and, as
soon as they had met him, made peace with him. El Motaleb sent to El Geraouï the order to go to Fostat; but
he refused to obey and navigated on his ships as far as Shatnouf. El Motaleb sent him El Seri ben El Hakem
with an army to ask him for peace; he consented to it, then sought to use ruse with them; but they were on
their guard. El Geraouï then retrograded on Bena, pursued by the enemies who harassed him. In his turn, he
asked for peace and showed himself amiable to El Seri. The latter went to meet El Geraouï on a boat. El
Geraouï did the same, and both met in the middle of the Nile, facing Sandefa. But El Geraouï had had prepared
in his boat ropes and given the order to his men who had remained at Sendefa to pull the ropes to themselves
as soon as his boat would be stuck to that of El Seri. The boat of El Geraouï therefore, having accosted that
of El Seri, El Geraouï attached it to his own boat and, the ropes being pulled, El Seri was made prisoner and
led to Tennis where El Geraouï had him imprisoned. It was in Gamadi I [18 December 814 to 16 January 815]. El
Geraouï continued the campaign, and having joined the army of El Motaleb at Saft Salit in Rageb [15 February
to 16 March 815], he defeated it. When 'Omar ben Melak had been destituted from his post of governor of
Alexandria, he revolted with the Spaniards and took the party of El Geraouï; 'Abd Allah ben Mousa ben 'Eïsi
marched on Egypt to avenge the murder of his brother El 'Abbas, in Moharrem of the year 200 [11 August to 9
September 815]; he united his troops to those of 'Abd el Aziz El Geraouï and both set out with numerous
troops, by the river and by land, and arrived at Gizeh. El Motaleb went to meet them with the Egyptians and a
battle was delivered in the month of Safar [10 September to 8 October 815]. El Geraouï returned to Sherqioun
and 'Abd Allah ben Mousa passed to the Hedjaz. El Motaleb having learned, beyond doubt, that it was Abou
Harmelah Farag El Asoued who had written to 'Abd Allah ben Mousa and had pushed him to undertake his
expedition, had him searched for, but Abou Harmelah fled to El Geraouï. El Motaleb activated his preparations
to combat El Geraouï, but the latter, having brought El Seri ben El Hakem out of prison, made with him a
treaty that obliged him [...]

[PDF p. 544]

[OF THE TOWN OF TENNIS, continued]

to revolt against El Motaleb and to depose him. El Seri having accepted this convention, was set at liberty;
he made known to the inhabitants of Egypt that letters had reached him naming him vali. The army composed of
people of the Khorassan came to meet him and recognized him as master, but the Egyptians refused to accept
him as vali. He went therefore to his house at El Hamra and, his troops having increased by a crowd of
Qeïssites who had joined him, he delivered combat to the Egyptians, put them to flight, and made of them a
great massacre. El Motaleb asked him for the aman which was accorded him, left Egypt, leaving El Seri ben El
Hakem completely master of the country, at the beginning of the month of Ramadan [3 April 816].

After the massacre of 'Omar ben Melak by the Spaniards, El Geraouï marched on Alexandria with 50,000 men. But
El Seri having sent an army to Tennis, El Geraouï returned on his steps and reentered Tennis in Moharrem of
the year 201 [30 July to 28 August 816]. The army having revolted against El Seri in the month of Rabi' I [27
September to 26 October 816], and having proclaimed Soliman ben Rhaleb, 'Abad ben Mohammed rose up against him
and deposed him. 'Ali ben Hamzah ben Ga'far ben Soliman ben Aly ben 'Abd Allah ben 'Abbas seized the power at
the beginning of Sha'ban, but Abad refused to recognize him and united himself to El Geraouï to whom soon
came to join himself also Soliman ben Rhaleb; El Seri, who was also with him, reentered possession of the
valiyat of Egypt, in Sha'ban, and fortified his authority. In Moharrem of the year 202 [20 July to 18 August
817], reached El Seri a letter of El Ma'moun prescribing to have proclaimed as heir of the caliphate Aly ben
Mousa El Radi who was, indeed, recognized in Egypt. But Ibrahim ben El Mahdi rose up against him at Baghdad;
he wrote to the chiefs of the army of Egypt, engaging them to depose El Mamoun and his adoptive heir and to
attack El Seri. In consequence, El Hareth ben Zar'ah ben Moharrem at Fostat, 'Abd el 'Aziz ben El Ouazir el
Geraouï in the Delta, and Mosallimah ben 'Abd el Melek El Tahaoui in the Said revolted against El Seri and
declared themselves for Ibrahim ben El Mahdi. They confided by common accord the direction of the affair to
'Abd el 'Aziz ben 'Abd el Rahman El Azdi. El Seri having delivered him battle made him prisoner in Safar [19
August to 16 September 817]. All those who refused to recognize Aly El Radi

[PDF p. 545]

joined El Geraouï who had entrenched himself in Tennis and who saw his authority grow. He marched on
Alexandria, seized it, had the prayer made there in his name as well as in the towns of the Said; then he set
out with a strong army to combat El Seri; each of the two adversaries had gathered the most forces possible
to crush the other. El Seri sent against El Geraouï his son Meïmoun; the two armies met at Shatnouf and
Meïmoun was killed in Gemadi I of the year 203 [4 November to 3 December 818]. El Geraouï went with his fleet
to Fostat to burn the town; the people of the mosque came to find him and by their supplications softened
him; he left therefore Fostat and went on several occasions to make war against Alexandria. He was killed
there, at the end of Safar of the year 205 [14 August 820], by a stone launched by a machine; three months
after, El Seri died in his turn, at the end of Gemadi I [11 November 820]. After El Geraouï, his son Aly ben
'Abd el 'Aziz El Geraouï took his place and made war on Abou Nasr Mohammed ben El Seri, who had been named
emir of Egypt at Shatnouf after the death of his father. The two armies met at Damanhour, and it is said that
in the combat that was then delivered 7,000 men were killed; the son of El Seri fled to Fostat, pursued by
the ships of the son of El Geraouï; but the ships turned back and Abou Harmelah Farag interposed himself
between the combatants until they had made peace.

The son of El Seri died in Sha'ban of the year 206 [30 December 821 to 27 January 822], and after him the
valiyat passed to 'Obeïd Allah ben El Seri, who provoked in nothing the son of El Geraouï. El Mamoun sent to
Egypt Mokhallad ben Yezid ben Mozid el Shibani with an army of Arabs Rabi'ah; but 'Obeïd Allah ben El Seri
refused to make him his submission and fortified himself; they delivered each other battle, and Ali ben El
Geraouï joined Khaled ben Yezid, procured him victuals and provisions, and having set out, came to camp in
advance of the entrenchments of 'Obeïd Allah ben El Seri. The two armies delivered each other battle in the
month of Rabi' I of the year 207 [15 July to 23 August 822], and other combats followed which lasted until
the moment when Khaled withdrew into the Hauf. The son of El Geraouï, worried, used ruse and made depart from
his province Khaled who passed to the west of the Nile, where he established his encampment at Nahia, and the
son of El Geraouï withdrew to Tennis leaving Khaled in

[PDF p. 546]

a very precarious situation. The son of El Seri, profiting from these circumstances, marched against him in
the month of Ramadan [18 January to 16 February 823], made him prisoner, and dispatched him from Egypt to
Mecca by sea. El Ma'moun sent to 'Obeïd Allah ben El Seri his nomination as vali of the territory he
administered -- that is, Fostat Masr, the Said, and the west of the country; at the same time he named as
vali of Tennis and of the eastern Hauf, with farming of the taxes, 'Ali ben 'Abd el 'Aziz el Geraouï. But
when the son of El Geraouï came to collect the taxes of the people of the Hauf, these resisted and wrote to
the son of El Seri, asking him to aid them against El Geraouï. The son of El Seri sent his brother to their
rescue. The two armies met in the district of Bena, at Belqina, and delivered each other battle in Safar of
the year 209 [3 June to 1 July 824]. The struggle continued between them until the 2nd of Rabi' I [3 July
824] without one prevailing over the other. El Geraouï, with those who accompanied him, withdrew to Damietta,
and the son of El Seri marched on Mehallah Sheriqoun which he ravaged. He then sent an expedition against
Tennis and Damietta of which he made himself master. The son of El Geraouï, who during this time was at El
Farma, went to El 'Arish and camped between this last town and Ghazah, then, returning on his steps, he
attacked by surprise Farma, in Gamadi II [29 September to 27 October 824]. The partisans of Ibn El Seri fled
from Tennis and Ibn El Geraouï advanced as far as Shatnouf. Ibn El Seri marched to meet him, and the combat
was engaged. At the beginning of the day fate favored Ibn El Geraouï, but, fallen into the ambushes of Ibn El
Seri, he was put to rout in Regeb [18 October to 16 November 824] and went to El 'Arish. Ibn El Seri marched
on Tennis and Damietta, but, in Moharrem of the year 210 [24 April to 23 May 825], Ibn El Geraouï arrived and
seized Tennis and Damietta without combat. Ibn El Seri sent against him several corps of armies to which El
Geraouï delivered battle. While these two enemies fought thus, 'Abd Allah ben Taher arrived in Egypt; Ibn El
Geraouï went to meet him with riches and provisions, joining himself to him, and with him camped at Balbeïs.
Ibn El Seri resisted and Ibn Taher temporized, thus softening the adversary; he had contributions levied on
the country and went to camp at Zefta. At Zefta, he established across the Nile a dike by which he sent to
Shatnouf

[PDF p. 547]

'Eïzi El Geloudi. He placed at the head of his fleet, which had come from Syria, Ibn El Geraouï whose military
science he knew. El Geraouï put to flight the ships of Ibn El Seri, in Moharrem of the year 211 [13 April to
12 May 826]. Ibn Taher made peace with 'Obeïd Allah ben El Seri in Safar [13 May to 10 June 826], gave him a
robe of honor and made him a gift of 10,000 dinars; then he had him depart and sent him to El Ma'moun; and the
mutinies of Egypt were appeased by 'Abd Allah ben Taher.

In 377 [3 May 987 to 20 April 988], at Tennis, a goat brought to light a kid that had a great number of
horns; the head, the breast, the belly, and all the anterior part of the body were covered with white wool
and the posterior part with black hairs; the tail was like a tail of a ewe. A woman brought into the world a
little kid with a round head and that had two hands, two feet, and a single head, and the antepenultimate day
of Dhu'l Heggah of the same year [19 April 988], there was, at Tennis, a thunder, lightnings, a violent wind,
and profound darkness in the atmosphere; then, when the day reappeared, one saw in the sky a column of fire
that spread a color of a violent red on the sky and on the earth; and there rose a dust and a fog that seized
the throat. And this phenomenon ceased only at the fourth hour of the day, the moment when the sun
reappeared; it renewed itself for five days.

In 332 [4 September 943 to 23 August 944], a man and a woman presented themselves before the cadi of Tennis,
Abou Mohammed 'Abd Allah ben Abou-l Reïs. The woman asked that her husband accomplish that to which he was
obliged. The husband replied: I married her five days ago and I found that she had the attributes of the man
as well as those of the woman. The cadi charged a woman to verify the thing, and the latter declared that the
plaintiff had above her sexual part a member with two testicles and that the vagina was below; the member had
still its prepuce. The woman was very beautiful, but her husband repudiated her.

Abou 'Amr El Kandi says: Abou Naser Ahmed ben Aly told me that Yes ben 'Abd El Ahed had assured him having
heard his father recount this: "When 'Abd Allah ben Taher entered Egypt, I was among those who approached him,
and he said to me: '"Abd Allah ben Lahi'ah recounted to us that Abou Qabil had it from Sabi', who had said:
"O Egyptians, how can

[PDF p. 548]

your affairs march, when the dissension is in your country and you are governed sometimes by a lame man,
sometimes by a yellow man, sometimes by a beardless man. Finally, comes a man of the lineage of El Hasseïn
whose march cannot be delayed and who, despite all the obstacles, fills with justice the Green Sea."'" I have
explained this thus: There was trouble when El Seri governed, who was lame; the yellow man was his son Abou-l
Naser; the beardless one was 'Obeïd Allah ben El Seri, and you, 'Abd Allah ben El Taher, are the descendant
of El Hasseïn.

'Abd Allah ben Taher went to Alexandria, reestablished order there, and sent back Ibn El Geraouï to Iraq;
then, El Afshin came back with him to Egypt in Dhu'l Hegga of the year 215 [19 January to 17 February 831]. El
Afshin had for instructions to ask Ibn El Geraouï for the riches he possessed and, if he refused to deliver
them, to kill him. He asked him for them indeed, but Ibn El Geraouï having delivered him nothing, he killed
him three days after the feast of the Sacrifices (Courban Baïram).

In Gamadi II of the year 219 [13 June to 11 July 834], Yahia ben El Ouazir revolted at Tennis. El Mozaffar
ben Kandar, emir of Egypt, marched against him, engaged the combat near the lake of Tennis, made him
prisoner, and his army abandoned him.

In the year 239 [12 June 853 to 1 June 854], El Moutawaqqel gave the order to raise at Tennis, on the shore
of the sea, a citadel and put at the head of the construction Anbassah ben Ishaq, emir of Egypt, who made
great expenses for this work and for the citadels of Damietta and of Farma. In 249 [24 February 863 to 12
February 864], the waters of the lake of Tennis became sweet summer and winter, then became salty again
summer and winter; previously, they remained sweet for six months and salty for the six others.

In the year 348 [14 March 959 to 2 March 960], arrived from Sicily a fleet that ravaged the town of Tennis.

In the year 378 [21 April 988 to 10 April 989], one fished at Ashtoum-Tennis an enormous fish 28 cubits 1/2
long; on this length, the head occupied by itself 9 cubits; the circuit of the belly and the back was 15
cubits. The opening of the mouth measured 29 spans, and the width of its tail 5 cubits 1/2. It had two hands
that served it as fins and that were each three cubits wide. Its skin was thick, polished, and smooth; the
belly was striped with white and black streaks; its tongue was red and armed with points in the form of
feathers, long about [...]

[PDF p. 549]

[OF THE TOWN OF TENNIS, continued]

a cubit, and of which one made combs, for they resembled shell (tortoiseshell). This fish had two eyes like
eyes of an ox. The emir of Tennis, Abou Ishaq ben Loubah, had its belly opened and the body salted; there was
needed for this a hundred ardebs of salt. The upper jaw was raised and maintained with a long beam of wood,
and a man entered standing upright into the interior of the beast with baskets of salt without bending. One
transported this fish to the palace to show it to El Aziz Billah.

During the night of the Friday 18th of Rabi I of the year 379 [26 June 989], the people of Tennis saw nine
columns of fire shine in the horizon of the sky on the side of the North. And the people came out outside the
town, praying God until the morning, the hour when these fires disappeared. That year, one fished in the lake
of Tennis a big fish a cubit long. Its anterior half, comprising the head, the eyes, the neck, and the
breast, had the form of a lion; the two front paws were fixed to the breast and armed with claws; the
posterior part had the form of a fish without scales. One transported it to Cairo.

In the year 397 [27 September 1006 to 16 September 1007], a young woman brought into the world a daughter with
two heads, one having a white round face and the other a dark and gracious face; each head had two eyes.
These two heads suckled and ate, were placed on a single neck, and had only a single body with two hands, two
feet, a vagina, and a backside. One brought her to El 'Aziz to show her to him; he had money given to the
mother; the child, brought back to Tennis, died there some months after.

In 571 [22 July 1175 to 9 July 1176], arrived at Tennis nearly forty vessels of Sicily that occupied the town
for two days and withdrew; then in the year 573 [30 June 1177 to 18 June 1178] forty ships of Sicily came
again to Tennis, attacked the inhabitants, and seized the town. Mohammed ben Ishaq, admiral of the fleet,
finding himself separated from his vessels, having taken refuge with a handful of Muslims in the place of
prayer of Tennis. When the night had come, he and his companions rushed on the town and threw themselves on
the Franks who were not on their guard; he seized 120 of them and had their heads cut off. In the morning,
the Franks attacked the mosque, struggling with what was there of Muslims and killed nearly 70 of them; the
rest fled to Damietta. The Franks having pillaged Tennis,

[PDF p. 550]

set fire to it, burned it, and withdrew, the hands filled with booty and leading away numerous captives, in
the direction of Alexandria; they had stayed at Tennis for four days. In 576 [28 May 1180 to 16 May 1181],
the Franks of Ascalon arrived with ten fire-ships at Tennis. The commander of the town, a native named El
Mo'ez, captured a part of them. Egypt was then governed by El Melek El Adel who administered for the account
of his brother El Melek El Naser Salah el din Yousef, then in Syria. El Mo'ez passed, then returned making
prisoners and ravaging; the Muslims took arms against him and combated him; God gave them the victory over
him; they seized him, cut off his two hands and his two feet, and crucified him.

In the year 577 [17 May 1181 to 6 May 1182], the sultan had the citadel of Tennis put in state and the
apparatus of defense renewed, for the inhabitants, full of terror, no longer wished to stay in the town. The
remaking of the old walls, which one raised on what remained of the primitive foundations, cost 3,000 dinars
for the price of the materials and the salary of the workers.

In the year 588 [18 January 1192 to 6 January 1193], a rescript was published ordering Tennis to be evacuated
and its inhabitants transported to Damietta. The women and the baggage left the town in Safar [17 February to
16 March 1193], and there remained only the garrison of the citadel.

In Shawal of the year 624 [14 September to 12 October 1227], El Melek El Kamel Mohammed ben El 'Adel Abou Bekr
ben Ayoub had the town of Tennis destroyed, which was one of the most considerable cities, where were woven
the stuffs of linen and the veil of the Ka'bah.

El Fakehi, in his History of Mecca, says: I saw in the part of the Kasbah that is toward the western angle, a
veil bearing this inscription: "This veil forms part of the things that El Seri ben El Hakem and 'Abd el Aziz
ben El Ouazir El Geraouï ordered and was executed by the care of El Fadl ben Sahl Dhu'l Riasateïn (of the
double function) and of Taher ben El Hassein, in the year 197 [12 September 812 to 31 August 813]." And I saw
also a carpet in qobati of Egypt, placed in the middle of the Ka'bah, on the subject of which one had only
written on the angle of the temple in tenuous and black writing: "By order of the emir of the believers El
Mamoun, in the year 206 [6 June 821 to 26 May 822]." I saw also one of the carpets of El Mahdi on which was
written: "In the name of God,

[PDF p. 551]

may the benediction be given by God to 'Abd Allah El Mahdi Mohammed, emir of the believers; may God protect
his duration! Ismail ben Ibrahim has ordered to execute this carpet in the manufactory of Tennis, and it was
made by the hand of El Hakem ben 'Obeïdah in the year 162 [28 September 778 to 16 September 779]." I saw still
a carpet of qobati of Egypt bearing the inscription: "In the name of God, may the benediction of God (love
us). Made by order of 'Abd Allah el Mahdi Mohammed, emir of the children, may God affirm him! Mohammed ben
Soliman has prescribed to have executed in the manufactory of Tennis the veil of the Ka'bah, by the hand of
El Khatab ben Mosallimah, his employee, in 159 [31 October 775 to 18 October 776]."

El Messihi, in his events of the year 384 [15 February 994 to 4 February 995], says: In Dhu'l Qa'dah [7
December 994 to 5 January 995], Yahia ben Yemân arrived from Tennis, from Damietta, and from Farma, with
presents composed of baskets, stools, boxes filled with money, horses, mules, asses, three canopies, and two
cows for the Ka'bah.

In Dhu'l Haggah of the year 402 [15 March 1024 to 3 March 1025] arrived the gift sent each year by the town
of Tennis and which was composed of five she-camels with their housings, a hundred horses with their saddles
and their bridles, armors and numerous objects, three tents in cloth of Dabik with their divans, standards,
and all that the town gave habitually in furniture, money, and stuffs of price.

When El Hakem had disappeared, his sister, the lady Sett el Moulk, asked the governor of Tennis, on behalf of
El Hakem, to bring as soon as possible the money gathered by the governors who had preceded him. The sum
amounted to about 1,000,000 dinars and 2,000,000 dirhems, representing the taxes levied in the country for
three years and that had remained with the governor by order of El Hakem. The governor brought this money to
the princess who employed it according to her caprice.

In the year 415 [24 June to 22 July 1012], the news reached the caliph El Zaher li A'zaz din allah Abou
Hashem Ali ben El Hakem bi 'Amr allah, that the black soldiers and others had risen up at Tennis and claimed
their pay, accusing the governor who had had to take flight. As for the mutineers, they ravaged the country,
putting

[PDF p. 552]

all to pillage, robbing the inhabitants, infesting the roads; they had even removed from the Treasury 2,500
dinars. El Gergeraï, furious, rose, sat down again, and said: How has one been able to commit such an attempt
against the cash-box of the sultan? This action has harmed Tennis as much as the Treasury. And he sent fifty
cavaliers to seize the culprits. Tennis did not cease to prosper, and there was in Egypt no town more
beautiful nor better defended, until the time when it was destroyed by El Melek El Kamel Mohammed ben El
'Adel Abou Bekr ben Ayoub, in the year 624 [22 December 1226 to 11 December 1227]. Since, it has always
remained in ruins and there remains of it only the razed foundations in the middle of the lake. Of the
district of Tennis formed part Boura, Ayouan, and Sheta. The lake where the fishing is done today is little
deep; one can cross it by ford. Two boats navigate on this lake, one going up, the other going down, by the
same wind, and each of them has its sail equally filled with wind and their speeds are equal. In the middle
of the lake are numerous islands that one calls today El 'Ozab, plural of 'Ozbah. They are inhabited by
groups of fishermen; in some are salt-works where one gathers a sweet salt of an agreeable savor. The waters
of the lake, which are generally salty, become sweet at the moment of the flood of the Nile.

Tounah. -- Among the dependencies of the province of Tennis was a village named Tounah where were fabricated
stuffs similar to those of Tennis and where sometimes one executed the veil of the Ka'bah. El Fakehi says: I
saw also a veil given by Haroun El Rashid, made of qobati of Egypt and bearing this inscription: "In the name
of God; may the benediction of God reach the caliph El Rashid 'Abd Allah Haroun, emir of the believers: may
God treat him with generosity! According to the instructions of El Fadl ben El Rabi', this veil was made in
the manufactory of Tounah in the year 190 [27 November 805 to 16 November 806]."

Semnaï. -- Village of the district of Tennis, which was invaded by the waters of the lake and has become an
island. In the month of Rabi' I of the year 837 [16 October to 14 November 1433], one discovered a stone and
in turning it over one found medallions of glass in great number, bearing the names of the imam El Mo'ez li
din allah, of the imam El A'ziz billah Nazar, of the imam El Hakem bi 'Amr Allah, of the imam El Zaher El
'Azaz din Allah, and of El Mostanser; these last were the most numerous. This was recounted to me by someone
who had seen them.

[PDF p. 553]

Boura. -- Village between Tennis and Damietta; it is from it that takes its name the bouri fish and also the
Benou-l bouri who inhabited Cairo and Alexandria.

In the year 610 [23 May 1213 to 12 May 1214] the enemies arrived there on galleys and ravaged it, but the
forces of Rosetta having directed themselves on Boura, the enemy withdrew.

El Qeïs. -- is the village that has given its name to the qeïssiah stuffs; it forms today a heap of ruins on
the shore of the sea between El Souadah and El Ouaradah. Its distance from the town of Farma is about six
barids by land. There, an enormous hill of sand advances into the sea of Syria; the Franks put themselves in
ambush there to rob the travelers. Near this hill are saline terrains, from which one draws a salt that the
Bedouins carry to Gaza and to Ramleh. In the vicinity of these salty terrains are wells near which the
Bedouins of this valley cultivate fields of cucumbers.

[PDF p. 554]

CHAPTER XX
OF THE TOWN OF SA

When, says Ibn Ouasif Shah, Qobtim ben Misraïm had divided the country between Ashmoun, Atreb, Qoft, and Sa,
each of them withdrew into the domain that had been assigned to him. Sa, with his people, his children, and
his servants, went into his province which occupied the territories of the Beheirah and of Alexandria and
extended as far as Barca; Alexandria did not yet exist, and he installed himself in the town of Sa. Sa was
the youngest of the sons of Qobtim and his dearest child. As soon as he had taken possession of the
government of his province, he watched over the prosperity of the region, founded towns and villages, raised
temples, and executed marvelous objects as his brothers had done, and sought still to surpass them.

According to Marhoun the Indian, governor of Bânah, Sa raised towers along the sea from the limit of the
country of Sa to that of Libya and of Maraqiah; on these towers were placed mirrors made of diverse
amalgamated matters; of these mirrors, one was destined to repel the marine animals and to guard against
their depredations; another, if enemies arrived from the islands of the sea to attack them, directed on their
ships the rays of the sun and set them on fire; in another, one could see the towns situated just opposite,
on the other side of the sea, and what their inhabitants did; in another, one saw the diverse provinces of
Egypt, and consequently one knew the abundance and the dearth each year. He made baths that heated by
themselves, built belvederes and places of pleasure, and each day he went to one or the other with his
particular slaves and his servants. All around extended gardens where fluttered in liberty the singing birds
and where ran freely the tamed beasts; these gardens were furrowed by canals that flowed perpetually across
admirable flowerbeds. The windows of his palace were of colored glass that sparkled when it was struck by the
sun and dispersed its rays around. He had neglected nothing of what can please and charm. And the
cultivations extended without interruption across the desert from Rosetta and Alexandria to Barca, and each
could travel on the land of Egypt without provisions, thanks to the abundance of the fruits and all sorts of
excellent things, and one walked

[PDF p. 555]

constantly in the shade and sheltered from the sun. In these deserts he built palaces, made plantations of
trees, and brought there canals from the Nile. Thus, on the side of the Occident to the western frontier, it
was only an uninterrupted succession of cultivations. And when the inhabitants of it had disappeared, there
remained vestiges of it in these deserts; their dwellings have disappeared, the men are dispersed, but all
the travelers who have penetrated into these regions do not cease to recount that they have seen there
marvelous ruins.

From the author (Maqrizi): People worthy of faith who had it from the witness himself recounted to me that a
traveler, who had penetrated into the town of Sa and walked across its ruins, had met a brick four spans
long, that he had picked it up and examined it in all directions; then having broken it, he had found in the
interior an ear of grain a span long and laden with all its grains as if it had just been gathered. He
shelled it between his hands, and he drew from it white wheat with enormous grains, each of them big like a
bean seed; he ate it and found that the taste was the same (as that of present wheat). Another traveler
entered this same town toward the year 790 [11 January to 30 December 1388], picked up there a brick a cubit
and a half long and a cubit wide; he broke it and found there an ear of wheat very heavy, each grain being of
the size of the biggest chickpea. He managed to crush it only by grinding it vigorously with a stone. One has
found at Sa a pretty statuette a finger long. This statuette having fallen into a jar of water, the water was
changed into wine. This happened at the home of a man of Tennis who made his fortune in selling this wine.
The emir El Aouhad, governor of Tennis, had this man summoned and left him no rest until he had obtained from
him the statuette.

[PDF p. 556]

CHAPTER XXI
OF THE SAND OF THE OCCIDENT (THE WESTERN SAND)

This sand extends over the surface of the earth and has been named by someone the mamelonated (hummocky)
sand. The length of this desert, which begins behind the mountain of Tay and extends to the Eastern sea,
directing itself from behind this mountain toward Egypt, Nubia, and the Enveloping sea, is five months'
march; a branch detaches itself from the Holy Land toward the Bahreïn, traverses the Bahreïn, grazes the east
of Kouristan and Persia, returns toward the Sagestan, takes the direction of the Orient as far as Merw,
crosses the Gihoun in the desert of the Khouarezm, and, traversing the countries of Hadalahiah, extends as
far as China and the Enveloping sea to the east. According to the description one gives of it, it extends
therefore from the Enveloping ocean to the East to the Enveloping ocean to the West. There are found there
gigantic and inaccessible mountains. One of them, situated in the country of Sahlat, displaces itself from
one place to another. This sand is sometimes yellow and soft to the touch, or red, blue-grey, dark black,
dark brown like indigo, or white like snow. There is some that resembles a very fine dust; there is some that
is rough and coarse to the touch. Some people claim that the sand of the Occident, or at least what is
comprised between the frontier of El 'Arish and El 'Abbassah, is recent.

The cause of its formation has given rise to an account of high interest and very instructive: Sheddad ben
Haddad ben Sheddad ben 'Ad, one of the Adite kings, having marched against Egypt with a considerable army,
vanquished Ashmoun ben Masr ben Beïsar, son of Cham, son of Noah, who was then king of the country; he
destroyed all that this prince had constructed and what his fathers had constructed; he himself raised the
pyramids and erected a tower on which he engraved talismans: he traced the quarters of Alexandria, and stayed
there a long time; but a scourge having raged against him and his people, they left Egypt for the Ouadi-l
Qora, between the town of El Nabouyah and the country of Syria. He constructed circuses and reservoirs to
capture the waters of the rains and the torrents; each reservoir was a mile wide by an equal length; palms
and other trees were planted, cultivations of all sorts extended between Raïah and Aïlah to the sea of the
Occident; the dwellings they occupied

[PDF p. 557]

covered all the space between El Dathna, El 'Arish, and El Goufar, in the land of the Shalah; one found there
gushing springs, fruit trees, and considerable cultivations. The Adites remained in this country very long
and ended by becoming quarrelsome, wicked, proud, and noisy. "We are," they said, "the most valiant, the
strongest, the most powerful." And God raised against them a hurricane that made them perish, destroyed their
reservoirs and their houses, and the sand extended over the country they had inhabited; such is the origin of
the sand one sees in the country of El Goufar -- that is, in the space comprised between El 'Abassah, there
where today are the village of El Salahieh and El 'Arish; all this sand comes from the crumbling of the
edifices of the Adites and the degradation of their materials, when God made them perish by the wind and
annihilated them definitively. Take heed! This fact has been denied because of its strangeness. But a passage
of the Koran testifies of its authenticity, it is when God says: "And among 'Ad, when we sent against them
the destructive wind, all on which this wind passed became dust" (Koran, LI, 41, 42); that is, something worn
out, worm-eaten. One says of a dried terrestrial plant trodden underfoot that it is [ramim]. One says of torn,
burned paper that it is [rufat] (like a dried and crushed plant). The term [rufat] (same signification)
applies to every thing worn out and fallen into dust.

Maraqiah. -- The town of Maraqiah forms one of the districts of western Egypt; it is the extreme frontier of
Egypt, bordering on the land of the Pentapolis or land of Barca. It is about two barids from the town of
Santariah. It was formerly an important region, abundant in palms and in cultivations, where one found living
springs; one meets there still at present admirable ruins. The culture there was so prosperous that a single
grain of wheat produced a hundred ears, or ninety ears at the least. It was the same for the rice which was
superb. One meets there still in our days numerous gardens. Formerly Maraqiah was inhabited by the Berbers
whom David had chased from the land of Palestine; a great number of them fixed themselves in this region; the
rest separated from the first; the Zenabah, the Magilah, and the Darissah went to inhabit the mountains (the
desert), while the Louata fixed themselves in the land of Barca and the Hawarah at Tripoli of the Occident.
Later, the Berbers covered the country as far as Suez. In Shawal of the year 304 [18 March to 27 April 917]
of the hijra of Mohammed, the populations of Libya and of Maraqiah

[PDF p. 558]

made their appearance at Alexandria; they fled to escape the tyranny of the despot of Barca. Maraqiah has
always been in a state of anarchy, but in our days it is completely destroyed; there have remained however
magnificent traces of monuments.

Kom Sherik. -- This locality is situated in the vicinity of Alexandria; it is spoken of in the chronicles.
Its name comes to it from Sherik ben Sami ben 'Abd Yaghouth ben Gez El Mouradi El Qatifi, one of the
companions of the Prophet. He marched in the vanguard of 'Amr ben El 'As, at the conquest of Alexandria.
Pressed by the Greek army, Sherik and his companions took refuge on this Kom (hill) where they held their
heads up to the Greeks until the arrival of 'Amr. Kom Sherik forms part of the Hauf Ramsis.

Rheïfah. -- Village in the vicinity of Belbeïs, two stages from Fostat. It was a place of halt for the
caravan of pilgrimage. It is recounted that the measure of the king (the royal measure) that one had sought
since the town of Masr, was found again at Rheïfah, among the utensils of the brothers of Joseph.

Samanoud. -- There was in this locality a temple where was represented a shield bearing an inscription. Ibn
Zaoulaq recounts that Abou-l Qassem Mamoun El 'Adel had copied the inscription on a sheet of paper to which he
had given the form of a shield, and he adds: "No one could find himself facing him without turning away and
taking flight." There were there also statues and the image of those who were to reign over Egypt, among
others a people bearing the turban and armed with the javelin above which was written: "These will seize the
town of Masr."

[PDF p. 559]

CHAPTER XXII
OF THE TOWN OF BALBAIS

This country is named, in the book of the Jews, the land of Goshen. It is there that Jacob descended when he
came to find again his son Joseph, who had him installed in the land of Goshen -- that is, of Balbaïs El
'Alaqamah -- to pasture there his flocks. According to Ibn Saïd, the vali of Balbaïs commands as far as El
Maradah, extreme limit of Egypt. Up to this point the traffic is done in silver; from there on, one uses
copper as far as El 'Arish, which is the first point of Syria, or, it is said, the last point of Egypt.

Abou 'Obeïd El Bakri says that Balbaïs is a locality very well known situated near Masr. Ibn Khordadabeh, in
his book of the "Roads and the Kingdoms," says that between Balbaïs and the town of Fostat Masr there are 24
miles.

El Ouaqedi recounts that El Maqoqos married his daughter Armanosah to Constantine, son of Heraclius, and sent
her with her treasures, her slaves, her pages, and her escort to rejoin her spouse who was to accomplish his
marriage with her in the town of Caesarea. As enemies besieged this last town, she went to Balbaïs and stayed
there; she sent her grand chamberlain with two thousand cavaliers to Farma to guard the road and prevent
whoever it might be, Greek or other, from passing into Egypt. El Maqoqos dispatched messengers toward the
frontier of his country, on the side of Syria, with order to let no one enter Egypt; he feared that if one
spread the news of the conquest of Syria by the Muslims, fear might penetrate into the heart of his soldiers.
'Omar ben El Khattab having gone to El Gabiah, 'Amr ben El 'As marched on Egypt and camped before Balbaïs
where was Armanosah, the daughter of El Maqoqos. The people of Balbaïs delivered battle, but 'Amr killed them
nearly a thousand cavaliers, made three thousand prisoners; the rest fled and went to rejoin El Maqoqos.
Armanosah was taken with all her treasures

[PDF p. 560]

and all that was at Balbaïs belonging to the Copts. 'Amr, desiring to be amiable to El Maqoqos, sent him his
daughter Armanosah whom he treated generously, and restored to her her riches. Armanosah was accompanied by
Qeis ben Abou-l 'As El Sahmi. El Maqoqos was happy to receive his daughter. Then 'Amr went to the palace.
Balbaïs did not cease to be one of the most important towns of Egypt until the arrival of Mori (Amaury), king
of the Franks, who seized it by main force after a long siege where thousands of its inhabitants were killed.
There are numerous accounts that concern it. It has been ruined since the accidents that occurred in Egypt
after the year 806 [21 July 1403 to 9 July 1404]. Previously, I had seen this town quite prosperous; one
counted there numerous gardens and its inhabitants were rich and fortunate.

[PDF p. 561]

CHAPTER XXIII
OF THE COUNTRY OF EL OUARADAH

El Ouaradah forms part of the territory of El Gofar. 'Obeïd allah ben 'Abd allah ben Khordadabeh, in his book
"of the Roads and the Kingdoms," says: The road and the territory that extend from Ramleh to Ardoud is 12
miles; from Ardoud to Gaza there are 20 miles; then, to El 'Arish, 24 miles, across the sands; from there to
El Ouaradah, 18 miles; from there to El Gharib, 20 miles; from there to Farma, 24 miles. The caliph El Mamoun
said:

[verses:] Your night has been at Meïdan shorter than at Farma. A stranger in the towns of Egypt, you
experience chagrin and sadness.

From Farma to Garir, 30 miles; from there to Qaserah, 24 miles; from there to the oratory of Qoda'ah, 18
miles; from there to Balbaïs, 21 miles; from there to Fostat Masr, 24 miles.

The author of the History of Damietta says: The Muslims, already masters of Damietta and of Tennis, having
seized Farma, went to El Baqarah whose inhabitants embraced Islamism; from there they went to El Ouaradah
whose inhabitants converted likewise, as well as the population of the surroundings as far as Ascalon.

The cadi El Fadl, in his accounts relative to the month of Moharrem of the year 567 [4 September to 3 October
1171], says: We arrived in the morning at El Ouaradah; we had passed the night in the port, after which we
entered into the town. I saw the date inscribed on the minaret of the mosque, 408 [30 May 1017 to 19 May
1018], and I read there the name of El Hakem bi 'amr allah. This town forms part of the territory of El Gofar
and takes, it is said, its name from the word [el ouroud] (the arrival). Its mosque was opened to the cult
and frequented by the faithful until after the year 700 [16 September 1300 to 5 September 1301]. The country
that El Ouaradah anciently occupied is found to the east of the present locality of El Salahieh; one meets
there some traces of constructions, but the palms there are rare.

El Salahieh. -- This country was founded by El Melek El Saleh Negm el din

[PDF p. 562]

Ayoub ben El Kamel Mohammed ben El 'Adel ben Abou Beker ben Ayoub ben Shadi in the country of the Mosâneh and
of El 'Alaqamah, at the entrance of the expanse of sand that separates Egypt from Syria. There he raised
palaces, a mosque, a market to serve as a halt for the troops, at their coming out of the sands, and this in
the year 644 [19 May 1246 to 7 May 1247].

[PDF p. 563]

CHAPTER XXIV
OF THE TOWN OF EILAH

Ibn Habib says that Othal is the valley of Eïlah, and that Eïlah is a town situated on the shore of the sea
between Egypt and Mecca; it takes its name from Aïlah, daughter of Madian, son of Abraham. Aïlah is the first
point of the land of the Hedjaz; it had been a powerful town on the shore of the sea and of a flourishing
commerce; its population was a mixture of diverse races. It was formerly the limit of the Empire of Roum. At
a mile from this town rises a triumphal arch of Caesar; there the emperor had established a post of customs.
Between Aïlah and Jerusalem there are six stages, and El Tor, where God spoke to Moses, is a day and a night
from Aïlah. In the time of Islam, it was a place where the Benou Omayah stopped, most of whom were freedmen
of Othman ben 'Afan and distributed the water to the pilgrims. It was a country where one honored science and
belles-lettres; the commerce there was prosperous, the markets flourishing, the cultivations considerable,
and the palms numerous. The hill of Aïlah was not practicable on the backs of mounts, but Faïq, freedman of
Khamaraouya ben Ahmed ben Touloun, had it arranged, leveled the road, and repaired all that could be
repaired. There were at Aïlah numerous mosques and a great quantity of Jews. These claim to possess the
mantle of the prophet that he would have sent them as a safe-conduct, and they showed it. It was a mantle of
Aden enveloped in a stuff of which one raised only a span. It is said that Aïlah is the town of which God
spoke in this passage of his book: "Question them on this country situated on the shore of the sea and whose
inhabitants transgressed the sabbath; there the fish appeared at the surface of the water on the day of the
sabbath and disappeared the other days. Thus we tried them because they were prevaricators" (Koran, VII, 163).
One is not in agreement on the identification of this town. Ibn 'Abbas, 'Akramah, and El Saddi claim that this
town is Aïlah; according to Ibn 'Abbas also it would be a locality between Aïlah and El Tor; El Zaheri
believes that it is Tabriah (Tiberias). Gobadah and Zeïd ben Aslam are of the opinion that it is a point of
the coasts of Syria, between Madian and 'Aïnounah, named Ma'nah.

[PDF p. 564]

[OF THE TOWN OF EILAH, continued]

One asked one day El Hasseïn ben El Fadl: "Does one find in the book of God this proverb: That which is
permitted is met only with great difficulty, that which is forbidden presents itself of itself?" "Yes,"
answered El Hasseïn, "one finds that in the history of Aïlah, where it is said that the fish came to the
surface of the water on the day of the sabbath and disappeared the other days."

The inhabitants of the country, according to what the legend says, were Benou Israïl to whom God had
forbidden to work on Saturday. But Eblis (Iblis), using ruse, came to say to them: "It is forbidden you only
to take the fish on Saturday." They prepared therefore basins where they deposited the fish on Friday; the
fish remained there and could not come out because the canal of communication was too narrow. One took them
on Sunday. One of them, it is said, had thought of making a slip-knot in a cord and of throwing it to the
tail of a fish, and the fish was left thus until Sunday. The other fishermen amused themselves at first in
seeing their companion act thus, but thought of putting his invention into practice only when the fishing had
taken considerable proportions and these fish had become an object of commerce and a cause of manifest
impiety. A part of the Benou Israël protested and rose up against this practice of the forbidden things,
declaring that they would no longer dwell with the others, and, indeed, they separated the village into two
parts by a wall. Now, one morning, the just awoke in their dwellings and none of the wicked had yet crossed
the wall. "Certainly," said the just, "something must have happened to the others." And, having mounted on
the wall, they saw that the others had become apes. They descended on their side, and these apes, remembering
their human origin, came to them and sniffed their garments weeping. The sages said to the apes: "Had we not
forbidden you to do what you have done?" And the apes made sign of yes in moving the head. The young ones,
adds Qobadah, had been changed into apes and the old ones into swine; only the sages escaped. All have
disappeared since. This fact, according to what is reported, happened in the time of the prophet David. It is
said that the primitive name of Aïlah is Aïlailiah, of which it is question in the Pentateuch. The sherif
Mohamed ben As'ad el Gawarii says that the Berbers Dakalah are a branch of the Mousamedah; others say that
the Dakalah are the descendants of Aïlah. Ail is, it is said, the one who

[PDF p. 565]

gave his name to the hill of Aïlah. According to another, the Dakalah would descend from Daghfal ben Aïlah;
as for them, they claim themselves Berbers and say: "We are a branch of the Persians;" but on this subject
there are great contradictions. Masaoudi reports that Joshua, son of Nun, made war on Samida' ben Hazber ben
Malek the Amalecite, king of Syria, combated him in the country of Aïlah in the surroundings of Madian,
killed him, and seized his kingdom; it is on this subject that 'Oun ben Saïd El Garhami said:

[verses:] Have you not seen that the Amalecite, son of Hormez, had his flesh torn at Aïlah? For a great
number of Jews had hurled themselves against him, to the number of 80,000, cuirassed and not cuirassed.

This piece comprises a great number of verses. Ibn Ishaq recounts that when the prophet of God arrived at
Tabouk, the governor of Aïlah, Tahiah ben Roubah, came to ask him for peace and to bring him the tribute. The
inhabitants of Gerba and of Agrah came likewise to bring the tribute. The prophet wrote them a letter that
they have conserved. Here is what he wrote to Tahiah ben Roubah: "In the name of God the clement and
merciful; sincere letter on the part of God and of his prophet Mohammed to Tahiah ben Roubah, to the people
of Aïlah, to their bishops and to them all on land and on sea; to them protection on the part of God and
protection on the part of the prophet. Whoever is with them of the people of Syria, of the Yemen, or of the
sea: if anyone of them has committed some crime, his money cannot save his soul; their goods are the property
of who seizes them; they cannot prevent what they wish to prevent, nor pass by the road they would wish to
take by sea or by land. This letter was written by Gahim ben El Sait and Sharhabil ben Hassanah, with the
permission of the prophet of God in the year 9 of the hijra [20 April 630 to 8 April 631]." And the town of
Aïlah did not cease to be prosperous and peopled.

In the year 415 [15 March 1024 to 3 March 1025], 'Abd allah ben Edris el Ga'feri attacked by night Aïlah,
with the help of some Benou-l Gerrah, pillaged it, levied there 3,000 dinars and a great quantity of grains,
carried off the women and the children, then left the valiyah of Ouadi-l Qora. A detachment of cavaliers set
out from Cairo to combat him.

[PDF p. 566]

In the year 566 [14 September 1170 to 3 September 1171], says the cadi El Fadl, El Melek El Naser Salah el din
Youssef ben Ayoub (Saladin) thought of constructing articulated boats, loaded them on camels, and with a
numerous army set out from Cairo to attack the citadel of Aïlah of which the Franks had made themselves
masters and where they had fortified themselves. He arrived before Aïlah in Rabi' I [12 November to 11
December 1170], had the boats raised and assembled, launched them to the sea, garnished them with arms and
combatants. He put the siege before the citadel by sea and by land, and seized it the 20th of Rabi' II [31
December 1170], killed or made prisoners the Franks who were there, established as garrison a detachment of
his own troops, to which he left all of which they had need in arms and other provisions, and returned to
Cairo at the end of Gemadi I.

In the year 77 [year 677], arrived a letter of the governor of Aïlah saying that the vessels kept good guard,
but that one dreaded the coming of the Franks. Soon after, indeed, presented himself Alaïris (Edward?), may
God curse him! He surrounded the citadel of Aïlah, sent his army into the region of Tabouk to make sure of
the coasts of Syria, for he feared that an army might have been sent against him from Syria or from Egypt. In
the month of Sha'ban of this same year, the rains fell with such abundance on the mountain that faces the
citadel that the garrison of Aïlah could for two months neglect to descend to the fountain; the persistence
of the rains even damaged the constructions of the citadel which cracked, because of the little depth of
their foundations; the proprietors had to repair and consolidate them.

Abou-l Harran El Masa'oudi, in his book Accounts of the Time, at the beginning of the account relative to the
history of the Koukas, recounts that this people had four kings who governed the land of Aïlah and the
Hedjaz; each of them had built himself a town to which he had given his name. The rest of the country was
planted with tents and divided into thirty districts distributed in 4 provinces, each province having a king
seated on a throne of gold and residing in his own town. Each of these kings raised a palace for the science
and a temple for the planets, placed there statues of gold, each statue having a special rank. To Alexandria,
whose name was then Raqoudah, were attached fifteen districts; this town became the sojourn of the greatest
of the priests, and in

[PDF p. 567]

its temples were raised more statues of gold than in the temples of the other towns; there were there two
hundred statues of gold. The Said was divided into eighty districts forming four provinces, and the towns
inhabited by the Egyptians of the interior in the districts of the Said were to the number of thirty, all
filled with marvelous things. It is recounted that Himyar the Great, whose name was 'Arangah, son of Saba the
Great, whose name was 'Amer, better known under that of Abd Shams ben Yeshgab ben Ya'reb ben Qohtan, it is
recounted that this Himyar, having succeeded his father, gathered his army and set out, subjugating the
peoples and subduing the kings as his father had done. He continued his course to the Orient, repelled Yagog
and Magog toward the point where the sun rises, then he turned back toward the Occident. A tribe of the
people of the Yemen, of the lineage of Hud ben 'Aber ben Shaleh ben Arfakhshad ben Sam ben Nouh came to him
fleeing Thamoud ben 'Ather ben Aram ben Sam ben Nouh and the calamities he made them undergo. He gave
therefore the order to remove them from the land of the Yemen and to transport them to Aïlah, and they
peopled the country from Aïlah to Zat El Asal at the extremity of the mountain of Negd. There Thamoud cut the
rocks; one dug houses in the mountains and, as this people had become insolent and proud, God sent it Saleh
as prophet and as apostle; but these people did not believe him and asked him to make a she-camel come out of
a rock; when the prophet had made her appear, they cut her hocks. And God destroyed them by a cry, and the
next morning, they lay all inanimate in their houses.

It is reported that after the death of his brother Aaron, Moses went with the Israelites to the land of the
children of El 'Eïss whom one calls the mountains of El Serah, near the country of El Shoubek. And having
traversed it, he passed to the country of Aïlah, then, many days after, took the direction of the desert of
Bab, there where are the countries of the Kark, and made war on these peoples. There was near Aïlah a
considerable and very important town named 'Asaboun.

Marbout. -- It is one of the districts depending on Alexandria, a town so white that one did not perceive
there the fall of the night until a very long time after. The people, to walk there, held in the hand a black
stuff to protect their eyes; because of the dazzling whiteness of the town, the monks there were dressed in
black. The town of Marbout was situated at the extremity of the cultivations and the gardens that succeeded
one another to the land of Barca; today, it forms part of the districts depending on Alexandria; one
cultivates there the fruits

[PDF p. 568]

and other products. El Melek El Mozaffar Rokn El din Bibars El Gashankir put it in waqf as a gift of
beneficence to the mosque of El Hakem at Cairo. There, a mosque was constructed in the year 666 [22 September
1267 to 9 September 1268]; then El Melek El Moayyad Sheikh El Mahmoudi took it on lease in the year 821 [8
February 1418 to 27 January 1419], extended there the culture of the gardens which had been ruined by the
incursions of the Arabs of Lebdah and of Barca, and it was attached to the divan of the sultan.

Ouadi Habib. -- This Ouadi is situated to the west of the land of Egypt, between Marbout and the Fayoum. One
gathers there the salt and the natron. It takes its name from Habib ben Mohammed ben Mo'aqqel ben El Ouaqe'ah
ben Hozâm ben 'Afan El Ghafari, one of the companions of the apostle of God and who had attended the conquest
of Mecca. On his subject, Abou Tamin El Gishani recounts what follows: the freedman of Tagib converted to
Islamism at the same time as Saïd ben 'Abd el Rahman El Ghafari. In the time of the revolt of Othman, he had
taken refuge in this Ouadi which took his name. And he said: "There is no difference to establish between men
for the Ramadhan, and one must do the two prayers even during the voyage." This Ouadi is also called: Ouadi El
Melouk, Ouadi El Natroun, Berriah Shahab, Berriah el Asqi, Mizan el Qoloub. There were there a hundred
Christian convents, but there remain only seven of which one will speak in the chapter of this book that
treats of the convents. It is a Ouadi of an extreme utility; one finds there the natron, from which one draws
a considerable revenue; one finds there also the Andrani salt and the Soultani salt; this last has the form
and resembles tablets of marble. There also one harvests the ammoniac and the black antimony; one fabricates
there the glass. It is there also that one finds the Masekah, a sort of yellow earth enclosed in a black
stone; one dissolves it in water, and one drinks the solution which is efficacious against the maladies of
the stomach. The Ouadi produces still the Bardi reed of which one makes the mats. One meets there the spring
of the Crow, a sort of little basin about fifteen cubits long and as wide, which is found in a grotto in the
interior of the mountain. One does not know whence this water comes, nor where it goes; it is sweet and
limpid.

It is reported that from this Ouadi came out 70,000 monks holding each a staff in the hand, who went to meet
'Amr ben El 'As at El Teranah,

[PDF p. 569]

[OF THE TOWN OF EILAH, continued]

while he was returning from Alexandria. They asked him for the Aman for themselves and their convents. 'Amr
therefore wrote them an Aman that they have conserved. He made them also another letter, on the subject of
the dues to be paid by the region of the North, and remitted it to them. And their dues amounted, in a single
year, to more than fifteen thousand ardebs; today, it is hardly that they reach a hundred of them.

[PDF p. 570]

CHAPTER XXV
OF THE TOWN OF MADIAN

Madian is a town of the people of Sho'aïb, of the lineage of Madian, son of Abraham; their ancestress was
Qantourah, daughter of Yoqtan the Canaanite, who gave Abraham eight sons of whom each was the stock of a
people. Madian is situated on the sea of Qolzoum, facing Tabouk and at about six stages from this point; it
is greater than Tabouk. It is there that is found the well where Moses drew the water for the camels of
Sho'aïb and near which he had raised his tent.

According to El Farra, Madian is at once the name of a town and that of a region. It is also, it is said, the
name of a tribe that drew its denomination from its ancestor Madian, son of Abraham, a name that signifies
"the warriors," etc. Almost everyone agrees in saying that Madian is a non-Arab word, although some claim it
Arab; if it were Arab, it would be of the form [fa'lan] and would derive from [dana]; it would then have the
sense of "place where one resides"; but it is a rare construction. Others see in it a word of the form
[mif'al] or [maf'al] derived from [dana]; but in sum, the origin of it is not clear; one cannot know with
certainty if it is a name of land or of tribe, and if the word is Arab or non-Arab.

El Masa'oudi reports that the people of the Koran were in discussion with the people of Sho'aïb ben Noufal ben
Ra'ouil ben Masr ben 'Eïqa ben Madian ben Ibrahim, a people who spoke Arabic and who, according to some,
would be none other than degenerate and corrupt descendants of Arabs; one of the writers we have cited goes
so far as to say that they are the representatives of a people completely disappeared; for others, they are
of the lineage of El Mahasen ben Gendal ben Ya'seb ben Madian ben Ibrahim, and Sho'aïb would be the last of
the race. They obeyed several kings who had divided regions neighboring one another. Among them were Abgad,
Hawaz, Hataï, Klamen, Sa'fas, and Qorshat. These kings are, as we have said, the descendants of El Mahasen
ben Gendal. The ensemble of the names of these kings is none other than the union of the twenty-two letters
that form the complete alphabet. These letters

[PDF p. 571]

have been interpreted also in another fashion than that we have reported. Abgad was king of Mecca and of the
part of the Hedjaz that touches it; Hawaz and Hataï were two kings of the country of Oug -- that is, of the
Taïf and of the country of Negd that adjoins it; Kliman, Sa'fas, and Qorshat were kings of Madian or, it is
said, of the country of Egypt; Kliman dominated at Madian; certain authors claim that Kliman reigned over all
the countries we have just named; those who think thus are fairly numerous and approach our opinion. What is
certain is that the chastisement by the burning wind reached Kliman, one of these kings. Sho'aïb had engaged
them to embrace the true religion, but as they refused to believe him, he threatened them with the
chastisement by the burning wind: the sky opened on them a door of fire; Sho'aïb and all those who had
believed in him saved themselves at the place called Aïlah, a marsh situated in the vicinity of Madian; the
others, feeling the catastrophe come, for the heat became terrible and death appeared certain, sought to
rejoin Sho'aïb and his companions who were protected by a white cloud under which they breathed a cool air
and felt no harm. They chased Sho'aïb and his companions from the place where they kept themselves, imagining
that thus they would make cease the scourge descended on them; but God raised a fire that reached them. The
daughter of Kliman made an elegy for her father; she was then in the Hedjaz:

[verses:] Kliman has broken my support in dying in the midst of Mahallah; the chief of the people has
received death by the fire in the midst of a burning wind. This wind has formed a fire by which has
disappeared the house of my tribe.

El Motanasser ben El Mounzer El Madiani said:

[verses:] O Sho'aïb, you have said a thing that made 'Amr perish and made the son of 'Amr live; they were the
kings of the land of Hedjaz whose face was like the rays of the radiant sun or of the disk of the moon; they
inhabited the sacred land; they were the ornament of the countries they inhabited; they carried it off by
generosity and glory. They are the kings sons of Hâtai and Sa'fas the generous and of Hawaz, the master of
Thaniah and of Hegr.

On these kings, says El Masa'oudi, there are Muslim histories that

[PDF p. 572]

speak of wars and expeditions, of the conquest of these kingdoms, of their government, and of the fashion in
which they annihilated the peoples who were there before them. It is claimed that the forest of which God
speaks in the Koran, at this passage: "The masters of the forest treated the envoys as importunate" (Koran,
XXVI, 176), and at this other: "And the inhabitants of the forest were wicked, we drew vengeance of them"
(Koran, XV, 78-79), is Madian; according to others, it would be the region of the seashore near Madian;
according to others, a forest in the vicinity of Madian; on another side, it is claimed that the masters of
the forest are the people to whom Sho'aïb sent a message and who resided at Tabouk between El Hagar and the
frontier of Syria, and that Sho'aïb was not one of theirs, but a Madianite. According to Abou 'Obeïd el Bakri,
the forest cited in the book of God is that which served as shelter to the people of Sho'aïb. On this subject,
Ibn Abbas cites two interpretations: according to one, the forest would be at Madian itself and would have
been of the domain of Sho'aïb; according to the other, this forest would have occupied the seashore on the
side of Madian. Their trees were the doum palms, and among this people the word aïkah signifies "a bushy
tree." They possessed therefore bushy trees. According to certain commentators, El Aïkah signifies "the
forest"; as for Leïkah, it is the place-name designating the surrounding country, as one says Mekkah and
Bekkah. Abou Ga'far el Nahas says that the word Leïkah is not known as a place-name. Some, says Ibn Qoteibah,
think that Bekkah is the place of prayer and the region that surrounds it is Mekkah; one makes a similar
difference between El Aïkah and Leïkah, El Aïkah signifying "the forest," and Leïkah the region that
surrounds it.

Madian, says El Bakri, is a country of Syria in the vicinity of Gaza; it is cited in the book of God. Others
believe however that Madian forms part of the land of Egypt. The prophet of God sent a detachment of cavalry
to Madian under the conduct of Zeid ben Harethah who brought back people of Mita prisoners. According to Ibn
Ishaq, Mita is the seashore. These people were sold and the mothers were separated from their children; now,
the prophet having come out as they were in the process of weeping, asked what was happening. When one had
told it to him: "Sell them only together," he declared. Madian is one of the points inhabited by the tribe of
Gedam ben 'Adi ben El Hareth ben Massah ben Âdad ben Zeïd ben 'Amr ben 'Azeïb ben Zeïd ben Kahlan. And the
prophet Sho'aïb who was sent to the people of Madian is a descendant of Ouaïl ben Gedam.

[PDF p. 573]

It is recounted that the prophet of God said to the troop of Gedam: "Welcome to the people of Sho'aïb and to
the family of the wife of Moses; the hour will not pass that the Messiah will have chosen his wife among you
and that he will not have from her his child." According to Mohammed ben Sahl, the surroundings of Madian are
of the nature of the soil of Medina like Fadak, Fara', and Rohat.

From the author (Maqrizi): There were on the territory of Madian numerous important towns, but, the
inhabitants having abandoned them, they have become deserted, and until our days -- that is, until the year
825 [26 December 1421 to 14 December 1422] -- there have remained standing about forty towns of which one
knows some; as for the others, their name is unknown. Among those whose names are known, and in the space
comprised between the Hedjaz, Palestine, and Egypt, there are sixteen towns, of which ten on the side of
Palestine: El Khalesa, El Sanita, El Modasrah, El Meniah, El A'oug, El Khouiraq, El Birein, El Maein, El
Saba', El Mo'allaq; the most considerable of these ten towns are El Khalesa and El Sanita. One draws from
them many of the stones that one transports to Gaza where one employs them for construction. On the side of
the sea of Qolzoum and of El Tor, the towns of Madian are Faran, El Raqah, Qolzoum, Aïlah, and Madian. In the
town of Madian, there are still today marvelous ruins and gigantic columns.

One found in the citadel of the town of El A'oug, in the year 760 [6 December 1358 to 22 November 1359] and
some, a well very wide and of a depth of nearly a hundred cubits: in the bottom were a great number of books
on shelves; one carried to the surface one of these books two cubits long and more and bound between two
little planks of wood; it was written in musnad characters and the alif and the lam had nearly a span of
length. One found in the country of Kark someone who could decipher them; it was a volume of a work in ten
volumes that began with "The glory is to God!" then spoke of the going out of Moses from the land of Egypt
for the country of Madian, and of the kings of Madian successors of Sho'aïb; in this book, one gives to Moses
a quantity of names, among others his Arab name Mousa ben 'Amran, his Hebrew name Moshé, his Persian name
Daran, his Coptic name Herousis; one recounts there that he had married the daughter of Sho'aïb and that he
remained at Madian for eight years, after which he said to the son of Sho'aïb: "I have accomplished the
convention made with you, but by goodness on my part, I will accord you two years more."

[PDF p. 574]

CHAPTER XXVI
END OF THE ACCOUNTS CONCERNING THE TOWN OF MADIAN

"And Moses departed directing himself toward Egypt; the king of Madian was then Abgad whose power had become
considerable and overflowed onto the Hedjaz and the Yemen. He had five sons: Hawaz, Hataï, Klimen, Sa'fas,
and Qorshit. Abgad, after having reigned for a hundred years over the Yemen, died leaving, to succeed him in
the government of this region, his son Klimen; to his son Hawaz he had attributed in division the Hedjaz; to
his son Hataï the land of Egypt; to his son Sa'fas Mesopotamia and the countries of Mossoul and of Harran as
far as Iraq; and to his son Qorshit Iraq and the regions of the Khorassan that adjoin it. Of the five
brothers, Qorshit was the most violent; Sa'fas, Hawaz, and Klimen were, on the contrary, just and patient; as
for Hataï, he was renowned for his brutality and his insolence. At this epoch, the Israelites were in Syria, a
region that did not yet obey the sons of Abgad and had escaped their domination. Since the death of their
father Abgad, his sons reigned about a hundred fifty years; the duration of this dynasty, including in it the
reign of Abgad, was therefore three hundred years and more. After them, the Israelites were subjugated by
Rouzeït ben Hawaz and by Arzeit ben Hataï ben Abgad who reigned over them for nearly seven years, after which
the lineage of Abgad ceased to reign."

The Madianites kept this book a long time and had it at the end carried back into the cistern of the citadel
of A'oug.

I hold this account from the vigilant and energetic guardian Abou 'Abd allah Mohammed ben Ahmed Mohammed ben
'Abd El Rahman El Rhariani El Tounisi, who added: This was reported to me by Shater ben Rhanim el 'Amari who
had it from an old man he had met in Palestine and who, having seen this very old book, had retained the
passage we have cited.

It is recounted that Mâlek ben Da'r ben Hagar ben Gadilat ben Lakhm had twenty-four male children whose
descendants had become so numerous that they constructed towns, villages, and fortresses, peopled

[PDF p. 575]

all the country of Madian, and conquered Syria, Egypt, the Hedjaz, and other countries still that they
possessed for five hundred years after the death in the waters of the Pharaoh of Moses and the death of
Daloukat bent Zafân; it was the prophet of God Solomon, son of David, who expelled them, and the kingdom
remained thenceforth in the hands of the Copts.

[PDF p. 576]

CHAPTER XXVII
OF THE TOWN OF FARAN

This town, one of the towns of Amalec, is situated on the shores of the sea of Qolzoum and occupies the
summit of a hill that rises between two mountains. In these mountains are pierced innumerable grottoes filled
with cadavers. From the town to the sea of Qolzoum, there is one stage. The shore bears in this place the
name of "Banks of the sea of Farân"; it is there that God made Pharaoh perish in the waters. Between the town
of Farân and the desert of Tih, one counts two stages.

Farân is, it is said, the name of the mountains of Mecca or, according to others, of the mountains of the
Hedjaz. In the Torah and in the Explanation (the Targum), it is said that Farân and El Tor are two towns of
eastern Egypt. But the town of which we speak is not the Farân of which it is question in the Torah. It was,
according to what is said, Farân ben 'Amr ben 'Amaliq who gave his name to the mountains of the Holy Places
which are called mountains of Fârân or of Farân. The town of Farân forms still today part of the ensemble of
the towns of Madian; it abounds in palms with edible fruits and one sees there the traces of a considerable
canal; today, it is no more than a desert visited only by the caravans.

[PDF p. 577]

CHAPTER XXVIII
OF THE LAND OF GOFAR

The Gofar is the name given to an ensemble of five towns: El Farma, El Baqarah, El Ouaradah, El 'Arich, and
Rafag. The Gofar entirely is only sand, and this name was given to it because of the difficulty that men and
animals experience in walking there, so abundant is the sand there and so distant the stages one from
another. The camels become foundered (exhausted) in the Gofar; thus one named it Gofar as one called [hagar]
the cord that serves to tie the camel, [hagar] that with which one hobbles it, ['aqam] that which ties its
foot, [batan] the cord that serves as a girth, [khalam] that which holds the muzzle, [zamam] that by which
the muzzle is tightened.

El Baqarah takes its name from el baqar (the cowherds); El Ouaradah from el Ouarid (the one who descends to
the watering-place); El 'Arish from el 'Arsh (the shelters). As for Rafag, it is, it is said, the name of a
mountain.

In the ancient times, Khodam ben El 'Arian inhabited the Gofar which formed, according to what is recounted,
an uninterrupted succession of cultivated fields and renowned for their fertility; the inhabitants cultivated
there in abundance the saffron, the safflower, and the sugarcane; the waters there were abundant and sweet;
but the sand came that invaded from all sides the region, and God ended by making it disappear; since, it is
no more than an immense heap of sand that extends as far as El 'Arish and Rafag, forming a vast desert more
painful to traverse than the desert of the Occident; the water there is rare, the flocks are absent from it,
and one meets there no trace of men. Let us adore the one who transforms the state of things.

[PDF p. 578]

CHAPTER XXIX
OF THE SAID OF EGYPT

The word Saïd designates a portion of terrain raised above the soil; one says of a terrain that it is raised,
by opposition to that which forms a depression; one gives also this name to a terrain where there enters
neither sand nor sebakh. This same word designates still the "surface of the soil," "a good earth," "all good
loam." It was applied by the Arabs, in the time of Islam, to the southern part of Egypt, because this region
is raised, contrary to the other parts of Egypt; it is for this reason that one calls it "the High Land," and
because its soil contains neither sand nor sebakh, but is, in all points, excellent and blessed. The Said
bears as well the name of "Region of the South."

When Misraïm, says master Ibrahim ben Ouacif Shah, saw death arrive, he made his recommendations to his son
Qobtim; he had previously divided the land among his children and attributed to Qobtim the territory
comprised between Qouft and Assouan; to Ashmoun the region that extends from Ashmoun to Memphis; to Atrib the
Hauf entirely, and to Sa from the town of Sa of the Beheirah to the surroundings of Barqa. To his brother
Fareq, he had said: "I give you the territory that extends from Barqa to the Occident"; and Fareq became the
master of Ifriqiah and his descendants were the Afareq (the Africans). And Misraïm prescribed to each of his
sons to build himself a town in his province.

The children of Masr, reports Ibn 'Abd el Hakem, and the children of their children having multiplied, Masr
divided the territory among his sons, assigning to each of them and to his posterity a portion of the country
and a section of the Nile; Qoft received as an apanage the region of Qouft where he installed himself and
which from him took the name of Qouft; he had in addition all the region situated upstream as far as Assouan
and downstream as far as Ashmoun, to the east and to the west of the river; the share of Ashmoun comprised
the territory that extends from Ashmoun to Memphis, to the east and to the west; Ashmoun established himself
in the town of Ashmoun, to which he gave his name; to Atrib fell the region situated between Memphis and Sa;
he resided at Atrib which was named thus after him; finally to Sa was devolved the country

[PDF p. 579]

[OF THE SAID OF EGYPT, continued]

that extends from Sa to the sea; he established his residence in the town of Sa and gave it his name. All of
Egypt formed thus four divisions, two in the Said and two in the Delta.

Abou-l Fadl Ga'far ben Tha'leb ben Ga'far El Edfaoui, in his book of the Happy Risings (of the planets), says
regarding the Said: The extent of the upper Said is twelve days' march by camel and its width three hours'
march at most, taking account only of the cultivated part; to the orient, its territory borders on the sea
and the country of the Bedjas; to the occident, it extends as far as the Oases; the Said forms therefore two
divisions, one eastern and the other western, separated by the Nile. The eastern region begins at the
prairies of the Benou Hamim, whose district borders that of Girga in the province of Akhmim, and ends to the
south of El Hou, there where begins the country of the Nubians; it is in this region that are Tig, Qoûft, and
Qous. The region of the occident begins at Bardis, whose district borders, it too, that of Girga; in this
region is the town of Samhoud; it ends at Assouan. The palms abound there on the two banks of the river. The
surface of the lands of these two regions, planted with palms and with gardens, is about 20,000 feddans; the
planet that dominates over the Said is Jupiter.

There was, it is said, formerly in the Said a palm that produced six ardebs of fruit; a vali having had its
bark torn off, the tree, that year, bore not a single fruit. This palm was on the western bank; in the times
of dearth, an oueiba of its fruits sold for a dinar. It is reported that when the world was subjected to the
emir of the believers Haroun ben Mohammed el Rashid, this prince found nothing truly beautiful except the
province of Siout, in the Said of Egypt; this province comprises 30,000 feddans of flat lands, and a single
drop of water suffices, in falling on it, to make it flourish entirely.

There are in the Said traces of the magic of the ancients.

The emir Taqtaba, vali of Qous, in the time of El Naser Mohammed ben Qalaoun, recounts the following fact:
"Having had a sorceress arrested, I asked her to show me a sample of her know-how. 'My best trick,' she
answered, 'is to enchant a scorpion in the name of a person, and the animal will absolutely have to sting
that person, communicate to him its venom, and make him die.' 'Make me see that,' I said to her, 'and
designate me

[PDF p. 580]

for the experiment.' She took a scorpion, made over it her grimaces, and gave the liberty back to the animal
which set about pursuing me; I sought to avoid it, but it persisted after me. Finally I went to sit on a
chair placed in the middle of a basin filled with water; the scorpion approached the water and made a
thousand efforts to reach me; it had to renounce it however and, directing itself toward the wall, it climbed
there, followed the ceiling, and, as soon as it was above my head, let itself fall quite near me; I gave it
at once a blow and killed it. Then I had the sorceress also put to death."

The Said abounds in pastures where graze sheep and other animals that reproduce there in a fashion so
extraordinary that a single ewe gives birth in ten years to one thousand twenty-four offspring, and this in
the most natural way in the world, each ewe giving birth only once a year and giving only a single ewe per
litter; if each litter were of two young and if each mother gave birth twice a year, the number in question
would find itself multiplied by itself; make the calculation and you will ascertain the truth of what I
advance. And it happens frequently that ewes of the Said give birth three times a year and give three young
per litter.

The greatest part of the Said was the property of six tribes: the Benou Helal, the Bala, the Gahinat, the
Qoraïchites, the Laouatah, and the Benou Kilab. With them had established themselves a great number of members
of other tribes, 'Ansaris, Mezinat, Benou Darag, Benou Kilab, Tha'lebat, and Gezam.

I have heard say, regarding the prosperity of the Said, that in the time of El Naser Mohammed ben Qalaoun,
and even after him, a man could go from Cairo to Assouan without carrying provisions, for he found in each
village, in each hamlet, a great number of houses destined to receive the strangers; if he stopped in one of
them, one gave the fodder to his mount and for himself one prepared all he could desire as nourishment, and
one served him. Today, it is quite different: the times are so hard that between Cairo and Assouan a traveler
would find no one who would offer him hospitality. The prosperity of the Said began to decline from the year
of anguish, under the reign of El Ashraf Sha'ban ben Hosseïn ben Mohammed ben Qalaoun, in the year 776 [12
June 1374 to 1 June 1375]. The situation became still more precarious in the time of El Zaher Barqouq, thanks
to the oppression

[PDF p. 581]

of the valis, and the region became more and more miserable until the year 806 [21 July 1403 to 9 July
1404], when Egypt was reduced to extremity by the absence of the flood of the Nile; the inhabitants of the
Said were, consequently, struck with indescribable calamities and such that, in the town of Qous, 17,000
persons died; at Siout 11,000 cadavers were washed and buried; at Hou the number of the dead rose to 15,000;
and in these numbers are not comprised the people gathered up on the roads, the unknown, the travelers, or
other people who were found in analogous conditions. Finally, the Said received the last blow in the time of
El Moayyad Sheikh. There remain today only vestiges of the ancient prosperity, vestiges that the valis have
forgotten to make disappear. We ask God to ameliorate the end.

[PDF p. 582]

CHAPTER XXX
OF THE CATARACTS. -- SURVEY OF THE ACCOUNTS CONCERNING NUBIA

'Abd Allah ben Ahmed ben Selim El Assouani, in his work entitled "Accounts on Nubia, the Maqorrah, 'Alouah,
the Bedjas, and the Nile," sets forth what follows: The country of Nubia begins at the village named El Qasr,
five miles from Assouan; the extreme stronghold occupied by the Muslims is the island of Bilak (Philae)
situated only a mile from the village that forms the frontier of Nubia; this interval constitutes the
"Nubian March." From Assouan to this place, the river is sown with numerous rocks that render the navigation
of it difficult for the boats; these can indeed cross this passage only by employing all sorts of complicated
means and by taking, to direct them, the most skillful fishermen of the place; the river is indeed barred by
steep rocks from which the water precipitates itself with an enormous noise that is heard from very far. There
is in the village (of El Qasr) a garrison and a gate by which one penetrates onto the territory of Nubia. From
this point to the first cataract of the country of Nubia, there is a distance of ten stages. In this region,
the Muslims are completely free; in the lower part they possess properties and do commerce with the upper
part; thus a great number of Muslims have established themselves there, but none of them speaks Arabic
correctly. The trees abound there, although the country is narrow, rugged, covered with mountains, and the
edge of the cultivated terrain departs only very little from the Nile. The river is bordered with villages.
The trees one meets there are the palm and the moql. The upper part of the province is wider than the lower
part. One cultivates there the vine. The Nile not being able to cover the lands that are there too elevated,
the water is brought there by machines set in movement by oxen, and one can thus irrigate terrains of one, of
two, or of three feddans. One harvests there only little wheat, but the barley and the rye are more abundant
there; the cultivated band being very narrow, one forces a little the cultivations of it; one amends it
during the summer with manure and silt, and one sows there dokhn, maize, millet, sesame, and peas. It is in
this region that are Negrash, capital of the Maris, the fortress of Ibrim, and another fortress situated more
to the North; there is the port of Adoua, fatherland of the sage Loqman and of Dhu'l Noun, where is seen a

[PDF p. 583]

marvelous temple. This province is submitted to a vali who depends on the suzerain of Nubia, and whom one
calls "the Lord of the Mountain"; the territory he administers touching, to the North, the country of Islam,
the Muslims who penetrate into Nubia have dealings with him, whether they sell him their merchandise or remit
him presents for him or for his master. The vali accepts everything and gives in exchange slaves, but
authorizes no one, neither Muslim nor other, to go to the sovereign.

The cataract of Nubia begins at the village of Taqouï. It is a beach where stops the navigation of the boats
that have gone up the river from El Qasr, (northern) limit of the province. The boats cannot go further, and
no one, neither Muslim nor other, can pass beyond this place without the authorization of the Lord of the
Mountain. From the village of Taqouï to the upper Meqs one counts six stages; all the interval comprised
between these two points is only a heap of rocks; it is the most abominable region I have seen in Nubia; the
soil there is rugged, narrowed, and the roads abrupt. On the side of the river, rocks and mountains obstruct
its course, so much so that the Nile can escape only through narrow gorges, and sometimes it is so narrowed
that its width, between the two banks, hardly reaches fifty cubits; on the side of the land, there are only
strangled defiles, steep mountains, and roads so narrow that it is impossible for a cavalier to follow them,
and that even a pedestrian cannot cross them, if he is not very robust. To the East and to the West, extend
indefinitely sands that serve as ramparts to the kingdom and where take refuge the inhabitants of the region
that touches the country of Islam. In the islands, grow rare palms and some meager cereals; the inhabitants
feed themselves above all on fish whose grease serves them to rub the body. These islands form part of the
Maris and depend on the Lord of the Mountain. The upper Meqs is occupied by a garrison whose chief depends
directly on the king of Nubia and watches the region so actively that, if the king himself comes to pass by
this place, he is stopped by the chief of the garrison who makes the simulacrum of searching him in order to
be able to act likewise with the son of the king, or his vizier, or any other functionary of less elevated
rank. Beyond this point, there are no longer either dinars or dirhems; the Nubians indeed do not [...]

[PDF p. 584]

[OF THE CATARACTS. -- SURVEY OF THE ACCOUNTS CONCERNING NUBIA, continued]

use money except to the north of their cataract to trade with the Muslims; on the other side, they do not
traffic among themselves, but exchange the objects of which they have need for slaves, livestock, camels,
iron, and grain. No one can pass beyond this point without the permission of the king; whoever transgresses
this order, whoever he be, is punished with death. Thanks to this precaution, one can know nothing of what
happens at their home, and a Nubian army can attack a neighboring country or a nomad tribe without one having
been able to suspect it. It is there that one gathers in the Nile the emery, that matter which is employed to
polish the precious stones. One plunges into the river and one finds the emery which one recognizes easily,
for it is colder to the touch than the other stones. If one has some doubts, however, one has, to recognize
it, only to blow on it with the mouth. Another cataract extends from the post in question to the village of
Saï which is the last bishopric of Nubia; there, the Nubians have a bishop, and one sees there also a temple.
Beyond, begins the province of Soqlouda, whose name signifies "the seven valis." This region resembles in
all points that which touches the country of Islam; like this one, it is sometimes wide, sometimes narrow,
and produces palms, vines, cereals, moqls; one sees there even some cotton-plants of which one makes coarse
stuffs; one cultivates there also the olive tree. The vali depends on the sovereign and commands particular
valis. In this province is the fortress of Astanoun, built at the point where begins the third cataract (of
Nubia), still more painful to cross than the others, for the course of the river is barred there by a
mountain that crosses it from east to west; the Nile escapes through three openings, and through two only
when the waters are low; the fall, which produces a deafening noise, presents a magnificent spectacle, the
river precipitating itself from the top to the bottom of the mountain. To the south of this cataract, the bed
of the Nile is sown with stones over an extent of three barids to the village of Yastou, where ends the
province of Maris and where begins that of Moqarrah. From this place to the Muslim frontier, one speaks only
the marisi. It is there the last province that belongs to Nubia; beyond, begins the district of Baqoun, whose
name signifies "the marvel," and which was given to this region because of its beauty. I have indeed seen
none on the banks of the Nile that is more vast; the river itself, according to what I have been able to see,
reaches in these regions a width of

[PDF p. 585]

five stages from east to west; its course is all sown with islands between which the waters flow; the banks
are very low and covered with villages that follow one another; the lands there are admirably cultivated, and
one sees on all sides dovecotes and prairies where graze the flocks; this region produces the greatest part
of what the capital consumes; the birds one meets there are: the naqit, the nubi, the parrot, and a thousand
other magnificent fowl; it is there that the sovereign goes most often on holiday. I accompanied him there
once, and to go there, we followed narrow canals whose two banks were shaded with trees. The crocodiles, it
is said, are inoffensive in these parts, and I have often seen some that crossed the canals by swimming.
After this district comes that of Safad Bâql, a district very narrow and quite similar to the region where
Nubia begins, only the islands are very numerous and magnificent; one meets there, in less than two days,
nearly thirty villages with pretty houses, churches, convents, numerous palms, vines, gardens, fields, very
extensive prairies where pasture livestock and camels of a russet color and of an excellent species. The
king goes there very often, for the southern limit of this district extends as far as Dongola, the capital of
the country. From Dongola, chief town of the province, to Assouan, one counts fifty stages. The author then
describes Dongola and adds: One employs, to make the roofs of the dwellings, beams of sont wood and of sag
wood that the Nile carries at the moment of its flood and that it brings all squared, and of which one is
ignorant of the provenance. I have myself seen on one of them strange signs. From Dongola to the frontier of
the country of 'Alouah, the nearest, there is a distance greater than from Dongola to Assouan. One finds also
on this side more villages, hamlets, islands, flocks, palms, trees, moqls, fields, vines, than on the banks
of the river on the side of the countries of Islam. One meets in this region considerable islands measuring
several days' march in extent, where rise mountains filled with wild beasts and ferocious animals and where
extend deserts where one can suffer from thirst. From this place, the Nile makes numerous bends toward the
Orient and toward the Occident, bends that prolong themselves for days and lengthen considerably the route,
as well to go up as to go down. It is in this province that the bend of the Nile is formed which extends to
the mines of El Shelah in

[PDF p. 586]

the region of the Shanqir. It is from there that set out El Amari, who seized the region and remained master
of it until there happened to him what happened to him. In this place abound the hippopotamuses, and it is
from this point that sets out the road that leads to Souakin, Basé, Dahlak, and the islands of the sea of
Qolzoum, a road that the Ommiades followed who, escaped from the massacre, took refuge in Nubia. A tribe of
the Bedjas, the Zénafegs, emigrated formerly into Nubia, has installed itself in this region; they continue
there the pastoral life and have conserved their language without mingling with the Nubians whose villages
they have refused to inhabit. They obey a vali who depends on Nubia.

[PDF p. 587]

CHAPTER XXXI
OF THE COURSE OF THE NILE FROM THE PROVINCE OF 'ALOUAH AND OF THE DIFFERENT PEOPLES WHO LIVE ON ITS BANKS

The Nubians and the Maqorrah form two distinct peoples not speaking the same language, but both living on the
banks of the Nile. The Nubians are none other than the Maris who inhabit in the vicinity of the countries of
Islam. Between the beginning of their territory and Assouan, there are five miles. It is reported that Selha,
ancestor of the Nubians, and Maqorris, ancestor of the Maqorrah, were originally from the Yemen; others claim
that the Nubians and the Maqorrah are Himyarites; but the generality of the genealogists is of the opinion
that the ones and the others descend from Kham, son of Noah. The Nubians and the Maqorrah made war on each
other before the appearance of Christianity. The territory of the Maqorrah begins at the village of Nafah, a
stage from Assouan. Their capital, which is named Negrash, is less than ten stages from the same town. It is
recounted that Moses, before his mission, made an expedition against this people, in the time of Pharaoh, and
destroyed Nafah. The inhabitants then were Sabeans and adored the stars, to whom they raised statues. Later,
the Nubians and the Maqorrah embraced Christianity. Their capital is Dongola. The country of 'Alouah begins
at a village situated on the eastern bank of the river and named El Abouab (the Gates); it is submitted to a
vali depending on the sovereign of 'Alouah and who bears the title of rahrah. From this region, the Nile
divides into seven branches; one of them, which comes from the Orient, carries a muddy water; but it is dry
during the summer and its bed is inhabited during this season. As soon as the time of the flood of the Nile
returns, the water begins to well up in the bed of the river and the depressions that are there fill little
by little; then come the rains, torrents form on all sides, and the river begins to overflow. It is said that
the extremity of this river is a considerable spring that escapes from a mountain. The historian of Nubia
continues thus: Simioun, hereditary prince of the country of 'Alouah, recounted to me that one finds in the
bed of this river a fish without scales and of a species that is not found in the Nile. It is necessary, to
make it come out, to dig a hole of the dimension of a man's height and even more; this fish

[PDF p. 588]

is enormous. On the banks of this river lives a tribe that partakes at once of the 'Alouah and of the Bedjah
and that one calls Digioun; to this tribe succeeds another, that of the Bazah from whose home comes the bird
that one calls the bazin pigeon. This people borders the territory of Abyssinia. The second river is the
White Nile, which comes from the side of the West and whose waters are as white as milk. I questioned a
traveler, who had traversed the countries of the Blacks, on the course and the color of the river that waters
these regions; here is what he taught me: the river in question comes out of sandy mountains and pours itself
into immense lakes situated in the country of the Blacks; from there it directs itself toward unknown
regions; its waters, which up to there are not white, owe their color to the soil on which they flow or to
another river it receives. On its two banks live diverse peoples. The third river is the Green Nile, which
comes from the South-East; its waters are very green, but extremely limpid, letting one see the fish that
inhabit them. The savor of these waters differs from that of the waters of the Nile, and they soon alter
(disorder) the one who drinks of them. The fish that people these rivers are of the same sort, but have a
different taste. At the moment of the flood, this river carries woods of Sag, of Boqani, of Rhatha (a wood
that has the odor of incense), and thick woods that one works and of which one makes oars. This sort of wood
grows equally on the two banks of the river. It is said that one finds there also odorous wood. I have seen,
adds the author, one of these pieces of Sag wood brought thus by the flood and which bore strange signs.
These two rivers, the White Nile and the Green Nile, join near the capital of the country of 'Alouah, and,
for nearly a stage, the waters of each of these rivers keep their color; then they mingle. Their waters, in
colliding, form enormous waves. Someone recounted to me having taken water of the White Nile and having
spread it in the Green Nile, where it remained, keeping the milky color, for nearly an hour, before mingling
in it. Between these two rivers is an island of which one does not know the end, no more than one knows the
end of these two rivers. One knows the width of them at their confluence, but the interval that separates
them goes certainly widening and reaches a [...]

[PDF p. 589]

[OF THE COURSE OF THE NILE, continued]

distance evaluated at a month's march; further, one can no longer know exactly which are the peoples who
inhabit the banks of these two rivers; these peoples dread one another; they are of very diverse races and of
high stature. One recounted to me that one of the sovereigns of the country of 'Alouah, wishing to know the
extent of this island, penetrated into it, but, after years of march, he could not reach the end of it. Those
who inhabit the south of the island remain with their flocks in houses dug under the soil like underground
corridors, shelter themselves there during the day against the excessive heat of the sun, and come out of
them only at night; some of them are completely naked. As for the four other rivers, they come also from the
South-East and their point of departure is unknown equally. They are however not as wide as the White Nile
and the Green Nile, and form neither as many arms nor as many islands; all four, like the first river, throw
themselves into the Green Nile which in its turn throws itself into the White Nile; the banks of all these
rivers are inhabited and cultivated and their course is navigable; one of them traverses Abyssinia. I have
myself made numerous observations on these rivers, and I have had them made by other travelers, but I have
found no one who had seen with his own eyes the source of any of them; what I have managed to know, by people
who informed me and who themselves had informed themselves of other persons, is that these rivers come out of
uninhabited regions and that at the time of the flood, one sees float on their surface debris of boats,
doors, and other objects that prove that beyond the desert region is an inhabited country. As for the flood
itself, everyone knows that it is the result of rains and of another special cause. The best proof of it is
the phenomenon that occurs for one of these rivers; it remains dry during the summer, and its bed is then
inhabited, then it fills at the time of the flood. An astonishing thing is that the flood occurs at once, and
in the same time, in all the rivers thus united, and in all the regions, at Masr and in the neighboring
region, in the Said, at Assouan, in Nubia, at 'Alouah, and further still. One has however observed many times,
regarding the flood, that when, for example, it occurs at Assouan, one ascertains it at Qous only a little
later. When the rains are abundant in the regions of the upper river and the torrents multiply there, one
knows that the year will be prosperous; but if the rains are rare, it will be the drought. I hold from
certain travelers, who have visited the country of the Zing, information on the route they followed: when one
is on the sea of China, one is pushed toward the country of the Zing by the

[PDF p. 590]

wind of the North; one follows, for two days, the eastern coast of the island of Egypt, and one arrives at a
place named Ras Haferi, which is considered as the extremity of the island of Egypt; then, observing the
stars to guide oneself, one directs oneself toward the Occident, then one turns to the North and, navigating
always toward the Septentrion, one reaches the town of Qabilah, where resides the sovereign of the Zing. When
these peoples prostrate themselves for the prayer, they turn in the direction of Djeddah. One of the four
rivers comes from the country of the Zing, for it carries trees that grow in this region. Soubah, town of the
country of 'Alouah, is found to the East of the great island formed by the white river and the green river,
at the northern point of this island, at the confluence of the two rivers; to the east of the town is the
river whose bed dries up and is inhabited. One sees in this town very beautiful constructions, vast convents,
churches where gold abounds, and gardens; one of its suburbs is peopled by Muslims. The king of 'Alouah is
richer than the king of Maqorrah; he has more warriors and more horses; his country is more fertile and more
vast; the palms and the vines however are rare there; the most abundant harvest is that of the white dourrah
which resembles rice; one makes of it bread and beer. One finds there much meat, for the livestock abounds as
well as the pastures which are there so vast and extended that one needs several days' march to reach the
mountains. The country produces horses of good race and Arab camels with russet hair. These peoples are of
the Jacobite Christian religion; as among the Nubians, their bishops are sent to them by the patriarch of
Alexandria. They use the Greek books that they translate into their language. They are less intelligent than
the Nubians. Their king is absolute master and reduces to slavery whom it pleases him among his subjects,
whether they be guilty or innocent; far from protesting, the man thus treated prostrates himself before the
master, and, without complaining of the injustice that strikes him, he cries: "Long live the king! may his
will be accomplished!" The king wears a crown of gold, for the gold is very abundant in his country.

One of the astonishing things of this country is that in the great island formed by the two rivers is a
people, the Kernina, who occupy a very extended region watered by the Nile and by the rains; at the time of
the sowing, each individual comes with what he possesses of seeds and forms an enclosure in relation with the
quantity of seeds he has brought; then he sows at the four angles of the enclosure a little quantity of this
grain and deposits the rest,

[PDF p. 591]

with a little beer, in the middle of the enclosure and goes away. The next morning, all the enclosure is
sown and the beer has been drunk; at the time of the harvest, one cuts some stalks that one deposits in a
place with beer, and one withdraws; when one returns one finds the harvest done and put into sheaves. One
does the same when it is a matter of threshing the grain or of winnowing it. But if someone, wishing to weed
his field, tears out by chance the least ear, he finds the next day all the field torn out. The district
where this happens forms an immense territory two months' march long by an equal width and is sown at the
same time. The subsistences of the country and of the king of 'Alouah are drawn from this region; boats are
sent there that come back with a cargo of grains; sometimes one must fight with the inhabitants.

The account we have just made is real and well known; one speaks of it throughout all Nubia and all the
country of 'Alouah; the Muslims who have traversed these regions to traffic there are convinced of its
reality and doubt it in no way. Moreover, if this fact were not attested by a number of persons so great that
one cannot really suppose that they have agreed on it, I would certainly not have spoken of it, so improbable
is it. The people of the country attribute this to the genies; they believe that certain persons can oblige,
by means of certain stones, the genies to serve them, to obey them, and to accomplish for them marvelous
things; even the clouds would obey them.

Among other marvelous things relative to Nubia, the king of Maqorrah recounted to me that, as soon as the
rain has fallen on the mountains, one gathers fish on the soil immediately after. I asked what species of
fish were found thus, and it was answered me that they were of small size and had a red tail. I have seen by
myself numerous individuals of the different tribes of which one has spoken above. Most recognize the
Creator; they make him sacrifices under the form of the sun, of the moon, or of the stars. Certain of them do
not know the Creator and adore the sun and the fire. Others adore all that pleases them: tree or animal. The
same recounted to me having seen one day, at an assembly held by the king of Maqorrah, a man whom he asked
what was his country: "My country," said the man, "is at three leagues from the Nile." Questioned on his
religion: "My lord is the same as yours; it is that of the king and of all men." "And where is he?" "In
heaven," answered the man, and he added: "When the rain fails us, or a scourge desolates us, or the sickness
descends on our flocks,

[PDF p. 592]

we go to the summit of a mountain, and there we address to God prayers immediately granted and which are
accomplished before we have descended from the mountain." One asked him if God had sent to their home some
prophet; he answered no; and as one reported to him what touches the mission of Moses, of Jesus, and of
Mohammed and the proofs they had given of it: "If they have done all that," he said, "one should believe in
them," and he added: "I would have believed in it, if I had seen them do all that."

The author resumes: The sons of Kenz el daoulah seized Nubia and reigned there from the year [...] (blank in
the text).

One raised at Dongola a mosque in which one gave hospitality to the travelers.

On the bank of the Nile, one meets still El Kanem where governs a Muslim chief; from this locality to the
country of Mali, there is a considerable distance; the seat of the government is established in a town named
Hima. On the side of Egypt, this kingdom begins at the country of Zerla; at the other extremity is the
country of Kaka. Between these two localities, there is a distance of nearly three months' very painful
march. The king of the country remains hidden and shows himself only on the two days of feast, in the morning
and in the afternoon; the rest of the year, he gives audience only hidden behind a curtain. The inhabitants
feed themselves on rice which grows in their country without cultivation; they harvest also wheat, maize,
figs, lemons, eggplant, radish, and green vegetables. They weave stuffs that bear among them the name of
dendi and of which each piece is ten cubits long; they use them as money by fractions of a quarter of a
cubit, or more; they employ also, as money, shells, glass beads, pieces of copper or of silver, the whole
brought back to the equivalent value of these stuffs. In the south of this country extend forests and
deserts where live wild individuals, such as the Fioul, fairly similar to man; a cavalier cannot reach them;
they scratch man and, at night, one sees shine at their home something that resembles fire. If one wishes to
approach them, they take flight; and if one wishes to pursue them, it is impossible to reach them; they flee
without cease

[PDF p. 593]

before the strangers. If one throws stones at them, they use them to produce sparks in striking them one
against the other. In this region, the gourds reach a size such that one makes of them boats in which one
crosses the Nile.

These countries extend from Ifriqiah and Barqah in the South to the middle of the western ecliptic. They are
regions dried up, deserted, and detestable. The first who carried Islamism there was the missionary El Hadi
el Othmani, a descendant of Othman ben 'Afan; since, these peoples have united with the sect of the Yeznis,
descendants of Seif ben Dhu Yezn, who follow the doctrine of the imam Malek ben Anis; between the two is the
just middle. They are of austere principles and not at all conciliating; in 640 [1 July 1242 to 20 June
1243], they raised at Masr for the Malekites a school known under the name of school of Ibn Rashiq, where
descend those who come to render them visit. God willing, we will speak of it in the chapter of the Schools.

[PDF p. 594]

CHAPTER XXXII
OF THE BEDJAHS, WHO ARE, IT IS SAID, OF THE RACE OF THE BERBERS

The country of the Bedjahs begins at the village of El Hazabah, a locality of the desert of Qous, where are
the emerald mines. From El Hazabah to Qous there are nearly three stages. El Gaheg (El-Jahiz) asserts that
there is no other emerald mine in the world than that one. The gem is found in deep and dark caverns into
which one enters with lamps and by fixing cords to guide oneself on the return; without this precaution, one
could lose one's way. One digs the soil by means of picks and one finds the emerald among the stones and
surrounded by a gangue that is neither as brilliant nor as pure. At its other extremity, the country of the
Bedjahs borders Abyssinia. The Bedjahs occupy in the interior of this island -- I mean the island of Egypt --
a territory that extends to the shore of the sea, on the side of the islands of Souakin, of Bada', and of
Dahlak. It is a nomadic population that transports itself, with its tents of skins, everywhere there are
pastures. They establish their descent by the maternal line, and each of their tribes obeys a particular
chief, but they have no king; they follow no religion. Among them, the inheritance is transmitted to the son
of the daughter or to the son of the sister, and no account is taken of the sons of the deceased, for they
claim that the birth of the son of the sister and of the son of the daughter raises not the least doubt, and
that these children, whether their mother had them from her husband or from any other, are no less the sons
of their mother. Formerly, they had a chief whom all the other chiefs obeyed and who resided in the village
of Hagr, at the extremity of the island of the Bedjahs. They ride russet camels that are born in their
country. The camels of Arab race are also very numerous among them, as well as the herds of oxen, of sheep,
and of ewes; their oxen are beautiful and shining and have very long horns; likewise their rams; these last
have a spotted skin; these herds furnish much milk. The Bedjahs feed themselves on the flesh of these animals
and use their milk as a drink; they eat very little cheese; however some eat of it. Their body is vigorous
and their belly

[PDF p. 595]

is lean; their complexion is of a yellowish color. They are very rapid at running and dispute on this point
with the other men. Their camels have also an extreme speed; they run a very long time and bear admirably the
thirst. With such mounts, the Bedjahs can compete in speed against the horses and surpass them; they make them
turn as it pleases them, and traverse, thus mounted, considerable extents of country. These camels serve them
still as mount to go to war; seated on their backs, they launch their javelins; when the launched javelin has
touched the target, the camel runs at full speed and its master can take the object; if on the contrary the
dart falls to earth, the animal lowers itself to permit its master to pick it up.

There was formerly among the Bedjahs a vigorous and bold man, named Kelâz, who possessed a camel of an
incomparable speed and one-eyed like its master. Kelâz had engaged himself before his tribe to go to the
oratory of Masr for the day of the feast; the feast was then near, and it seemed impossible to arrive at
Fostat in so little time. Kelâz however executed his promise and arrived at the agreed moment on the
Moqattam. Cavaliers set about pursuing him, but could not rejoin him. It is also he who was the cause that on
the day of the feast one posted sentinels at the foot of the mountain. The Toulounides and the other princes
of Egypt placed on this occasion at the foot of the Moqattam, on the side that looks toward the quarter named
El Habash, an important post of soldiers charged with watching over the security of the inhabitants until the
return of the feast. The Bedjahs are of a remarkable honesty; if anyone among them has wronged another, the
latter attaches a piece of stuff to the end of his lance and says: "This is the shelter of so-and-so" -- that
is, of the one who has committed the fraud. And he leaves thus the stuff and the lance until he has received
satisfaction. This people is very hospitable; if some stranger stops at the home of a Bedjah, the latter
kills for his guest an animal; if he receives the visit of more than three travelers, he kills for them some
beasts of the nearest herd, whether this herd belongs to him or belongs to another. If he has nothing he can
serve to his guest, he slaughters for him the mount of the latter, and, to compensate him, makes him a
present of a greater value. They have for arms lances sebaïah of which the iron measures three cubits and the
wood four cubits, whence their name. The iron is as wide as a sword; it is very rare that this arm escapes
their hands, for at the extremity of the wood is a sort of loop that prevents the lance from leaving the
hand. These arms are

[PDF p. 596]

fabricated by women in a place where no man approaches, except those who come to them to make their
purchases. It happens however that sometimes one of them becomes mother by the fact of a traveler; if the
child she brings into the world is a girl, one leaves her to live, but if it is a boy, one kills him, for,
they say, the men are good only to stir up quarrels and war. The Bedjahs have shields of ox-skins on which
one leaves the hairs; they also make use of shields of buffalo-skin, like the people of Axum, or of the skin
of a marine animal. Their bows have the form of the Arab bows; they are large and massive and made of sidr
wood or of shouhal; with these bows they launch poisoned arrows; the poison with which they impregnate them
is drawn from the roots of the ghalâq tree that one puts on the fire and that one lets boil until the liquid
becomes gluey. To test it, one of them pricks a part of the body and lets the blood flow; he then applies the
poison, and if the blood returns backward, one is certain that the poison is perfect; one wipes then the
blood, for fear that, reentering into the body, it kill the man; for every man reached by this poison dies at
once, were the wound no greater than the prick of a lancet. This poison has action only on the blood
contaminated by a wound; one can drink it with impunity. All the territory of the Bedjahs is only mines, and,
as one goes up into the interior, the gold is purer and more abundant. One finds there also mines of silver,
of copper, of iron, of lead, of magnet, of marcasite, of amethyst, of emeralds, and of asbestos stone which,
soaked in oil, lights like a wick; one meets there still other minerals; but one applies oneself above all in
the country to the search for gold, and the Bedjahs neglect absolutely the other mines. In the valleys grow
the moql, the myrobalans, the rush, the absinthe, the senna, the colocynth, the tree that produces the ban,
etc. At the very extremity of their territory one meets palms, vines, odoriferous plants that grow there
without cultivation. In this country live all sorts of wild beasts: lions, elephants, tigers, panthers,
monkeys, badgers, civets, and an animal pretty as the gazelle and that bears two horns the color of gold;
when it is taken, this animal cannot live long; in the way of birds, one meets there the parrot, the naqit,
the noubi, the turtledove, the hen of Abyssinia, the bazin pigeon, etc. From all the men, among this people,
one removes the right testicle; as for the women, one

[PDF p. 597]

cuts them the lips of the vulva; these lips afterward are drawn near and weld so well that at the moment of
marriage the man is obliged to make there an incision to his size; but this operation has become rarer. Here
is what would be its origin: A king had formerly made war on the Bedjahs, then he had concluded peace,
exacting from them that they cut the breasts of the girls who would be born to them and the member of the
boys, wishing thus to prevent the reproduction of the race; but the Bedjahs inverted the terms of the treaty
and cut the teats of the boys and the vulva of the women. There is among them a tribe that tears out the
incisors, in order not to resemble asses. Among another tribe, that of the Bazahs, established at the
extremity of the country, all the women bear the same name; likewise for the men. One day, a Muslim, a pretty
boy passing in the country, all the inhabitants called one another, saying: "Here is a god who has descended
from the sky and who has sat under the tree," and they remained to look at him from afar.

The serpents of this country are enormous and of very different species. One saw once in a pond a serpent
whose tail was already out of the water, throw itself on a woman who was drawing water and squeeze her with so
much force that the unfortunate one rendered her grease by the fundament. One meets there also a serpent
without head, spotted and of small size. Whoever walks on its trace dies; if someone kills it with a stick or
a javelin, and he does not throw his arm at the instant, he dies equally; one of these serpents having been
killed by means of a piece of wood, this piece of wood broke. If someone looks at this serpent, alive or dead,
its venom operates and kills the curious one. The Bedjahs are turbulent and very disposed to do harm. In the
time of Islam, and even before, they have committed depredations in Upper Egypt on the right bank of the
Nile; they have destroyed there numerous villages. The Pharaohs of Egypt have made against them several
expeditions and have signed treaties with them, because they had need of their mines; the Greeks acted
likewise, in the time of their domination in Egypt. One sees still their traces in the mines, of which the
directors were still at their post at the moment of the conquest of Egypt by the Muslims.

'Abd el-Rahman ben 'Abdallah ben 'Abd el Hakem reports that 'Abd allah ben Sa'd ben Abou Serah, returning
from Nubia, met on the banks of the Nile a group of Bedjahs and questioned them on their affairs; he learned
thus that they obeyed no king; their condition appeared to him so contemptible

[PDF p. 598]

that he left them without concluding with them either arrangement or treaty. The first who made a convention
with them was 'Obeid Allah ben El Hagab El Selouli, and 'Abd el Rahman recounts having found the letter
addressed by ben El Hagab to the Bedjahs, a letter bearing that one would send each year three hundred young
camels to the place of the countryside of Egypt that this people traversed to traffic, but without stopping
there; on the condition that on their side the Bedjahs would kill no Muslim nor any other subject of Islam;
if a murder were committed, the treaty would find itself annulled; that the Bedjahs would not give asylum to
the slaves of the Muslims, and that, if anyone took refuge with them, they would return him to his masters.
Every Bedjah who would steal a ewe would pay four dinars and for a stolen cow ten dinars. They had a
representative who resided in the countryside of Egypt and who served as hostage to the Muslims. Subsequently,
the Muslims flocked to the mines, mingled with the population, and married the women of the country, and the
greatest part of the tribe of the Hadareb became thus Muslim, without being however of a very austere dogma.
The Hadareb form the advanced point of the Bedjahs and occupy the region neighboring Egypt, from the northern
frontier of their country to El 'Alaqi, 'Aïdab where one embarks for Djeddah, and further still. Another of
their tribes, the Zénafegi, is more numerous than the Hadareb; but it is submitted to these last; it furnishes
them escorts and pastures their herds. Each of the chiefs of the Hadareb has in his patrimony a group of
Zenafeg, whom he regards as slaves and whom one transmits by inheritance; formerly however the Zenafeg had
been their masters. Then the incursions of the Bedjahs on the Muslim lands multiplied; the valis of Assouan
depended then on Iraq. The news of the depredations of the Bedjahs having reached the emir of the believers
El Mamoun, the latter sent to reduce them 'Abd Allah ben El Gahm; after several combats, a treaty intervened
between the Muslim general and the great chief of the Bedjahs, Kenoun, who resided in the village of Hagr of
which we have previously spoken. Here is the copy of this treaty: "Letter written by 'Abdallah ben El Gahm,
servant of the emir of the believers, chief of the expeditionary army, delegate of the emir Abou Ishaq, son
of the emir of the believers El Rashid, in the month of Rabi' I of the year 216 [18 April to 17 May 831], to
Kenoun ben Abd el 'Aziz, great chief of the Bedjahs, in the town of Assouan: You have asked me with
insistence to grant you [...]

[PDF p. 599]

[OF THE BEDJAHS, continued]

protection, you and the people of the Bedjahs, and to accord you the aman, to you and to them, on my part and
on the part of all the Muslims. I have consented to make with you a treaty that will be observed by me and all
the Muslims, as much as you and the people of the Bedjahs will keep the promises you have made and which are
registered in this letter. The portion of your country, plains and mountains, that extends from the frontier
of Assouan of Egypt to the region comprised between Dahlak and Badè, will be domain of El Mamoun 'Abd Allah
son of Haroun, emir of the believers; you and all your subjects will be slaves of the emir of the believers;
you will remain however sovereign of your country as you are presently, on the condition that you will pay
him each year the tribute that the Bedjahs paid formerly, a hundred camels or three hundred dinars sounding
and weighing true, which will be carried to the Beit el Mal; the choice in this is reserved to the emir of the
believers and to his valis; of this tribute you should retain nothing; when anyone among you speaks of
Mohammed, the apostle of God, of the divine book, or of the religion, let him speak of it as is fitting; if
anyone of your subjects kills a Muslim, free or slave, he will cease to be protected by God, by his apostle,
by the emir of the believers, and by the ensemble of the Muslims, and his blood will be spilled as is spilled
the blood of an enemy in battle. If anyone of you comes to the aid of the enemies of Islam, whether by giving
money, or by indicating the badly defended places of the Muslims, or by spying on the army, the protection
accorded by the present treaty will cease and the blood of the traitor may be spilled. If anyone of you,
voluntarily or involuntarily, kills a Muslim free or slave, or a protected person of Islam, if he steals
whatever it may be belonging to a Muslim or to a protected person of Islam, whether it be in the country of
the Bedjahs, in a Muslim country, in Nubia, or in any country whatsoever, on land or on sea, he will pay for
the murder of a Muslim ten times (the established price); for the murder of a Muslim slave, ten times the
price of the slave; for the murder of a protected person of Islam, ten times the price fixed in the country
of the victim; in case of theft done to a Muslim or to a protected person, he must repay ten times the amount
of the theft. If a Muslim enters into the country of the Bedjahs, whether to do commerce there, or to
establish himself there, or to traverse it, or to go to the pilgrimage, he will be among you in safety, as if
he were one of yours, until the moment when he will have come out of your territory. You will receive no
fugitive slave of the Muslims, and, if one comes to you, you will return him to the Muslims; you will return
also to the Muslims who would be

[PDF p. 600]

among you what belongs to them without their having to pay you any duty for it. If you descend into the
countryside of the Said to traffic there or only to pass there, you will be without arms and you will enter
under no pretext into the towns nor into the villages; you will prevent no Muslim from penetrating into your
country and from doing commerce there, whether by land or by water; you will maintain the roads safe and will
not cut the roads to the Muslims nor to the protected persons of Islam; you will steal nothing either from
the Muslims or from the protected persons; you will destroy nothing of the mosques raised by the Muslims at
Sihat, at Hagr, and in all your territory, over whatever length and whatever width it extends. If you did it,
the treaty would become null and the protection that is accorded you would cease. Kenoun ben 'Abd el 'Aziz
will dwell in the countryside of the Said of Egypt to represent there his country and to assure to the
Muslims the payment of the agreed tribute and the payment of what would be due to the Muslims as price of
blood or as restitution of objects stolen by the Bedjahs. No Bedjah will venture into the region that extends
from El Kasr to the village of Qôban, in Nubia, limit of the territory that the nomads traverse. 'Abd Allah
ben El Gahm, servant of the emir of the believers, accords to Kenoun ben 'Abd El 'Aziz, chief of the Bedjahs,
a general pardon, under the conditions enumerated and established in the present letter, and which must be
ratified by the emir of the believers. If Kenoun does not conform to it and commits some violence, the treaty
will become null and the protection will cease. Kenoun must authorize the representatives of the emir of the
believers to penetrate into the country of the Bedjahs to collect there the duty of alms from those of the
Bedjahs who would be Muslims. He must execute strictly all that has been agreed between him and 'Abdallah ben
El Gahm and that he has engaged himself to observe in the name of God and by the gravest oaths that men can
make. In exchange, Kenoun and all the Bedjahs can count on the faithful protection of God, on the protection
of the emir of the believers, that of the emir Abou Ishaq, son of the emir of the believers El Rashid, on
that of Abd allah ben El Gahm and that of all the Muslims; this protection consented by 'Abd allah ben El
Gahm will be of full effect as long as Kenoun ben 'Abd El 'Aziz keeps faithfully his engagements. If Kenoun
or any Bedjah whatsoever changes or alters some clause of the treaty, the protection of God will cease, and
likewise the protection of the emir of the believers, that of the emir Abou Ishaq, son of the emir of the
believers El Rashid, that of Abd allah ben El Gahm

[PDF p. 601]

and that of all the Muslims. All that is contained in this letter has been translated word for word by
Zakaria ben Saleh El Makhzoumi, inhabitant of Djeddah, and by 'Abd allah ben Ismaïl El Qoreïshi, and
registered by the assembly of the notaries of Assouan." The Bedjahs remained thus for a certain time, then
they recommenced to make incursions into the countryside of the Said of Egypt. Complaints, more and more
frequent, were carried against them to the emir of the believers Ga'far El Moutawakkel 'ala Allah, who sent
to reduce them Mohammed ben 'Abd allah El Qomi. The latter asked to make a choice among the men he preferred,
for he did not wish to lead a considerable army, because of the difficulty of the roads. He set out therefore
from Masr with a troop not numerous, but chosen, and marched against the Bedjahs, while his ships went up the
river. The Bedjahs came to meet him in an innumerable crowd and mounted on camels. This multitude frightened
the Muslims; but, to occupy the Bedjahs, Mohammed El Qomi wrote them a long letter on a rolled paper and
enveloped in a piece of stuff. The Bedjahs gathered to read it, and the Muslims rushed on them, having
attached to the necks of their horses little bells whose noise terrified the camels of the Bedjahs which took
flight carrying off their cavaliers. The Muslims threw themselves in pursuit of them and killed a considerable
number of them; the chief of the Bedjahs perished in the affair. His nephew, named chief in his place, asked
the suspension of hostilities, which was accorded him on the condition that he would himself go to make his
submission to the emir of the believers. He went therefore to Baghdad and from there went to present himself
to El Moutawakkel and at Serr-men-Raï in the year 241 [22 May 855 to 10 May 856]. One accorded him peace by
means of an annual due and the delivery of a certain number of slaves. It was decided also that the Bedjahs
would not prevent the Muslims from working at the mines. El Qomi remained some time at Assouan and left in the
magazines of the town all he had brought with him of arms and engines of war. The valis drew constantly from
these magazines, until at the end they emptied them. The Muslims having flocked to the mines and having mixed
with the Bedjahs, these became little by little less ferocious. After long researches, one discovered native
gold; the rumor of it having spread, a crowd of people arrived from all the countries. Abou 'Abd El Rahman
ben 'Abdallah

[PDF p. 602]

ben 'Abd El Hamid El 'Amari, after his expedition of Nubia, in 255 [20 December 868 to 8 December 869],
entered into the country of the Bedjahs, accompanied by the Rabi'ahs, the Gahinahs, and other Arab tribes.
The country of the Bedjahs was so peopled that the beasts of burden charged with carrying them the victuals
from Assouan were to the number of sixty thousand, without counting the boats that set out from Qolzoum and
disembarked at 'Aïdhab. The Bedjahs had an inclination for the Rebi'ahs and got along very well with them. It
is claimed that, before the introduction of Islamism among the Bedjahs, the priests of this country had
predicted to them, on the part of their divinity, that they would one day obey the Rabi'ahs, and this
prediction was indeed accomplished. After the murder of El 'Amari, the Rabi'ahs seized the islands, aided in
this by the Bedjahs; they chased from them the Arabs who were still there and married the daughters of the
chiefs of the Bedjahs. Thus was appeased the hostility of this people against the Muslims. The Bedjahs of the
interior -- that is, those who inhabit the desert of the country of Alouah, on the side of the Red Sea, to
the frontier of Abyssinia -- are nomads like the Hadareb, possess like them numerous herds, use the same
aliments, and employ the same mounts and the same arms; however the Hadareb are more courageous and less
turbulent. The Bedjahs of the interior have remained pagan, adore the demons, and regulate themselves
according to the decisions of their priests. Each group of population has a priest for whom one raises a hut
of beast-skins in which they go to make their adorations. When one has resolved to question him on something
of which one has need, the priest removes his clothes, enters into the hut backward, and comes out of it like
a madman and an epileptic, crying: "The demon sends you his salutations and tells you to withdraw from such a
place, otherwise such a people is going to rush on you. You have asked to make an expedition into such a
country; go, for you will have the victory and will carry off such or such booty. The camels that you will
carry off in such a place will belong to me, as well as such a young girl that you will find in the tent of
so-and-so and the ewes of such a species," and other similar discourses. The Bedjahs assert that most of
these predictions are accomplished. When they have carried off some booty, they withdraw from it what the
priest has mentioned and give it to him as being his property; if one of them opposes himself to it,

[PDF p. 603]

they refuse him the milk of their she-camels. If they wish to leave the place where they are established, the
priest charges the hut in question on a special camel, all covered with sweat, although the tent is empty and
contains nothing. They claim that this camel has great difficulty in rising and walking, and there has
remained among the Hadareb a tribe that still follows the same customs; some even ally these pagan practices
to those of Islamism.

All that I have just reported has been extracted from the work of the historian of Nubia. I have also seen in
a letter, addressed by certain tribes to the emir of the believers 'Ali ben Abou Taleb, that mention was made
of the Bedjahs and of the Kadjahs, who are very wicked, but little given to pillage. The Bedjahs are thus; as
for the Kadjahs, one knows of them only what 'Abdallah ben Ahmed, the historian of Nubia, says of them.

For his part, Abou-l Hassan El Masa'oudi reports what follows: The Bedjahs are established between the sea of
Qolzoum and the Nile of Egypt; they are divided into several tribes that all obey a single chief. In their
country are found mines of native gold and of emeralds. By numerous bands or by small groups, they go by
camel as far as the country of the Nubians where they commit depredations and carry off prisoners. Before it
was thus, the Nubians were more powerful than the Bedjahs; but, since the development and the triumph of
Islamism, the Muslims have come in crowds to establish themselves in the gold mines of the countries of
'Alaqi and of 'Aïdhab; into the same region have come also to inhabit a great number of Arabs of the tribe of
Rabi'ah ben Nazar ben Mo'add ben 'Adnan. Their importance has only grown by the crossings resulting from the
marriages contracted by the Arabs among the Bedjahs. These gained in power and married in their turn the
daughters of the Rabi'ahs. Thus with the aid of the Bedjahs, the Rabi'ahs became more powerful than the rival
tribes of the vicinity, the tribe of Qahtan and the other tribes established in these regions. It is thus
that the mine is found still in our epoch -- that is, in the year 332 [4 September 943 to 23 August 944] -- in
the hands of Beshir ben Merwan ben Ishaq ben Rabi'ah. This Beshir commands three million Rabi'ahs or allies
of the Rabi'ahs residing in Egypt and in the Yemen and thirty thousand Bedjahs armed with lances and
indigenous shields and mounted on camels. These warriors are of the tribe of the Hadareb, the only ones among
the Bedjahs who have made themselves Muslims; the Bedjahs of the interior are still [...]

[PDF p. 604]

[OF THE BEDJAHS, continued]

pagan and adore a special idol. The territory of the Bedjahs who possess the emerald mine extends to El
'Alaqi, where is the gold mine. From El 'Alaqi to the Nile, there are fifteen stages. The inhabited point
that is nearest to it is the town of Assouan. The island of Souakin is not quite a mile in length nor in
width. Between this island and the sea of Abyssinia extends a narrow strait that one can cross by ford; it is
inhabited by a tribe of the Bedjahs, the Khasahs, who are Muslims and have a king residing in the island.

According to El Hamadani, Kana'an ben Ham married Artib, daughter of Shawil ben Tares ben Yafeth, and had from
her Haqa, El Asaoud, Noubah, Qorân, El Zing, and El Zoghawah, ancestor of the Blacks. The Bedjahs, it is said,
descend from Cham, son of Noah, or according to others, from Qoush ben Kana'an ben Ham. Some hold the Bedjahs
to be a tribe of Abyssinians; however they live under tents of hair and have a complexion darker than the
Abyssinians. They wear the same costume as the Arabs and have neither towns, nor villages, nor cultivated
fields. Their victuals come to them from Abyssinia, from Egypt, or from Nubia. Primitively the Bedjahs adored
the idols; they converted to Islamism in the time of the emir 'Abdallah ben Sa'd ben Abou Serah. They are
large (generous) and generous, and distribute themselves into tribes and into groups of which each has its
special chief. It is a nomadic people that feeds itself only on flesh and milk.

[PDF p. 605]

CHAPTER XXXIII
OF THE TOWN OF ASSOUAN

Assouan comes from the word asa (to have need of consolation, to be sad, afflicted); one says of an afflicted
man [...]; a man who saddens himself, who afflicts himself.

Assouan is situated at the extremity of the Said and forms one of the frontier posts of the region,
separating Nubia from Egypt. One harvests there in abundance the wheat and other cereals, fruits, green
plants, and vegetables. One finds there also many camels, oxen, and sheep, whose flesh is excellent and very
fat and always sells very cheap. It is an entrepot for the merchandise and the objects that one dispatches
from this point into Nubia. To the East, Assouan touches countries that are not submitted to Islamism. To the
South rises the mountain that contains the emerald mine; this mountain is situated in a desert, far from
every inhabited place. At fifteen stages from Assouan is the gold mine. To the West, the territory of Assouan
extends to the Oases. One goes from Assouan to 'Aïdab, port where one embarks for the Hedjaz, the Yemen, and
India.

The town of Assouan, says El Masa'oudi, is inhabited by Arabs of the tribes of Qahtan, of Nezar ben Rabi'ah,
of Modar, and a great number of Qoreïshites; most of these Arabs come from the Hedjaz. The country abounds in
palms, and the soil there is so fertile that, if one plants in the earth a pit, there grows a palm that, at
the end of two years, gives fruits. The people who reside at Assouan are proprietors of numerous domains
situated in Nubia and whose taxes are paid to the king of the Nubians. These domains had been acquired from
the Nubians at the beginning of Islamism, under the reign of the Ommiades and the Abbasids. The king of Nubia
had sent to El Mamoun, at the time of his voyage in Egypt, messengers charged with asking the caliph the
restitution of these domains. The delegates, arrived at Fostat, set forth that inhabitants of Nubia and
slaves of their master had sold some of their domains to their neighbors of Assouan, that these lands
belonged to the king, for the Nubians are the slaves of the king and have no property

[PDF p. 606]

and occupied these domains only as slaves charged with putting them into cultivation. El Mamoun referred the
affair to the judge of the town of Assouan, and to the savants and the sheikhs established in this locality.
The people of Assouan, acquirers of these terrains, informed that they were going to escape them, sought the
means of deceiving the king of Nubia. For this, they went to find the Nubians who had sold them these
domains and engaged them to declare, when they would be cited before the judge, that they did not consider
themselves as the slaves of their king, and to say: "Our situation, we Nubians, is exactly yours vis-à-vis
your king; we must obey him and not infringe his orders. If you, others, are the slaves of your king and if
your goods belong to him, we are in the same situation." When the judge had them appear in the presence of
the delegate of the king, they repeated to him these words and others of the same kind that had been inspired
in them. As they refused to recognize themselves as slaves of their king, the sale has remained valid until
present, and the lands in litigation have been transmitted by inheritance; these lands are in Nubia, in the
province of Maris. Since, the Nubians submitted to the king of Nubia are divided into two categories; one, of
which we have just spoken and which does not consider itself as slave, and the other which is slave of the
king. These last inhabit the provinces of Nubia that are not neighboring Assouan; as for that which touches
this town, it is the province of Maris.

The Nubians divide into two branches: one has established itself to the east and to the west of the Nile and
occupies the two banks of it. Its territory touches the territory of the Copts of the Said of Egypt and has
developed itself in going up the river; it has arrived thus to the highest parts of its course and has built
there a capital; it is a considerable town that bears the name of Dongola. The second branch of the Nubians,
the 'Alouah, has also built a great town, Saraqtah. The part of the kingdom that touches the territory of
Assouan is called the Maris; it is from it that the marisi wind has taken its name; this province of the
kingdom borders the provinces of Egypt, on the side of the Said and of the town of Assouan. To the orient of
the Said of Egypt rises an enormous mountain of alabaster from which the ancients drew columns and other
pieces of architecture; as for the columns, bases, and capitals that the Egyptians name Assouanites and of
which one has made millstones, the ancients cut them hundreds of years before the appearance of Christianity;
of these columns formed part the column of Alexandria.

[PDF p. 607]

In Dhu'l Heggah of the year 344 [17 March to 14 April 956], the king of Nubia invaded Assouan and killed
there a great number of Muslims. Aunougaur ben El Akhshid sent against him, in Moharrem of the year 345 [15
April to 14 May 956], the Egyptian army, under the orders of Mohammed ben 'Abdallah El Khazen. The army
advanced by land and by water and sent prisoners into Egypt a great number of Nubians who had their heads cut
off. The king of Nubia beaten, El Khazen continued his march, carried the town of Ibrim, reduced its
inhabitants to slavery, and took again the road of Masr in the middle of Gamadi I of the year 345 [26 August
956], with a hundred fifty prisoners and a great number of (cut) heads.

According to the cadi El Fadl, the frontier post of Assouan brought, in 585 [19 January 1189 to 7 February
1190], 20,000 dinars; according to El Kamal Ga'far El Edfaoui, there were at Assouan eighty delegates charged
with the distribution and one gathered there in a single year 30,000 ardebs of dates. The employee of a
bureau affirmed to me that in this bureau there were forty directors, and that in another bureau there were
sixty of them, without counting the small employees. I have found myself, after the year 620 [of the hijra],
in a bureau that counted nearly forty archivists.

At the frontier post of Assouan dwelt the Benou-l Kenz, of the tribe of Rabi'ah, men admirable and worthy of
envy; El Fadl El Shedid Abou-l Hassan ben 'Arama composed their history in which he gives the relays, the
name of their towns, and of those who attacked them. And when the sultan Salah el din Youssef ben Ayoub
(Saladin) sent an army against Kenz el daoulah and his companions, this army set out from Egypt, entered into
the enemy houses, and found there qasidahs recalling their praises; among others the qasidah of Abou Mohammed
El Hassan ben El Zebir, where was this passage:

[verses:] He whom fortune abandons finds a support in these people whose support has nothing humiliating;
when they accord it, all that is under the stars is afraid; if they accord it, all that is on the earth is
miserable.

There was given him for these verses a thousand dinars and one constituted for him as

[PDF p. 608]

property a saqièh (water-wheel land) of the value of a thousand dinars. There were, in garrison at Assouan,
soldiers well provided with arms and charged with guarding the frontier post against the attacks of the
Nubians and the Blacks. At the fall of the Fatimites, this usage fell into desuetude and the king of Nubia,
at the head of 10,000 warriors, came to establish himself in the island that faces Assouan and made prisoners
the Muslims who were there. Since then, the situation of the frontier post went declining and the Benou-l
Kenz made themselves masters of it after the year 790 [11 January to 30 December 1388]; they committed
depredations and had with the valis of Assouan wars without number, until the appearance of the scourge that
followed the year 806 [11 July 1403 to 9 July 1404] and desolated all the province of the Said. The sultan
had no longer any authority over the frontier post of Assouan and was no longer represented there by a vali.
The situation remained thus long precarious. In Moharrem of the year 815 [13 August to 12 May 1412 -- error
for 1412], an expedition was sent against Assouan; the army delivered battle to the Benou-l Kenz, put them to
rout, destroyed the ramparts of Assouan, pillaging the town and leaving there only a heap of deserted ruins
without inhabitants. The army withdrew, abandoning the country in the state in which Abd allah ben Ahmed ben
Selim el Assouani described it, in his book entitled Chronicle of Nubia, where he says: When Abou 'Abd el
Rahman 'Abd allah ben 'Abd el Hamid el 'Amari had made himself master of the mines, he wrote to Assouan to
invite the merchants to go to him with the tools proper to the miners; and a man, named Othman ben Heïkhalah
el Tamimi, came to rejoin him with a thousand beasts of burden charged with tools and with wheat.

It is reported that after El Amari had returned from his campaign of Nubia to the country of the Bedjahs, the
prosperity increased to such a point that the camels that carried them the provisions from Assouan were to
the number of sixty thousand, without counting the boats that made the transit between Qolzoum and 'Aïdab. A
man worthy of faith among the Sheikhs of Assouan and who resided in the village of Asashi recounted to me
that one had seen, to the east of the Nile, a village with walls; a sycamore was planted before the gate and
people entered and came out. One went to this place, but one found nothing. This happened during the winter,
not during the summer, before the rising of the sun; many people have been witnesses of it and the account is
perfectly authentic. There was there

[PDF p. 609]

[OF THE TOWN OF ASSOUAN, continued]

all sorts of fruits and all sorts of vegetables, among others samples of vegetables greener than the beet.
Haroun el Raschid had had gathered all the species of fruits harvested at Assouan, a single fruit of each
species. He gathered thus a whole oueïba of fruits that one finds nowhere else than at Assouan.

[PDF p. 610]

CHAPTER XXXIV
OF BILAQ (PHILAE)

Bilaq is the most considerable citadel of the Muslims; it is an island neighboring the cataracts and
surrounded by the Nile. A town is found there which is occupied by a great number of inhabitants. One sees
there also magnificent palms and a mosque that contains a pulpit. It is there that stop the boats of the
Nubians, as well as those of the Muslims who come from Assouan. Between this island and the village of El
Qasr, first bourg of Nubia, there is one mile; four miles separate it from Assouan. Between Assouan and this
island, the river is sown with rocks and one can go up it only by employing all sorts of means and by having
oneself guided by the most adroit of the fishermen who inhabit these parts. At El Qasr is a garrison, for it
is there that is the gate by which one penetrates into Nubia.

[PDF p. 611]

CHAPTER XXXV
OF THE WALL OF THE OLD WOMAN

This wall served formerly as rampart to the country of Egypt which it surrounded entirely; it was furnished
with posts and garrisons, and behind was dug a canal filled with water and on which were thrown bridges. All
that was the work of Daloukah bent Zeba. This rampart, neglected, has fallen into ruins, and there remain of
it only some vestiges near Assouan, on the eastern bank of the Nile. Abou-l Qassem 'Abd el Rahman ben 'Abd
Allah ben 'Abd el Hakem, in his book entitled "Conquests of Egypt," recounts what follows: When Pharaoh and
his army had perished in the floods, there remained in Egypt none of his nobles; there were found there only
the slaves, the mercenaries, and the women. The noble women of Egypt gathered therefore to name a queen, and
their choice fell on the most noble among them, Daloukah bent Zeba, an intelligent, adroit, and energetic
woman. Of the most noble origin, she was also one of the most elevated by rank and counted, at the moment of
her election, a hundred sixty years. As soon as she was proclaimed queen, fearing the attack of the kings of
the earth, she gathered the noble women and said to them: "No one formerly cast on our country an eye of envy,
no one coveted it. But, at present, our chiefs and our nobles have perished; the magicians who made our force
have disappeared. Thus I have resolved to raise a rampart that will surround all our country, and to establish
there posts that will watch all the points of the horizon. For we must distrust those who might bear us envy."
And she built a wall that enveloped all the country of Egypt, fields, towns, and villages. At the foot of
this wall was dug a canal where the water was brought; bridges were thrown on this canal and gates opened in
the wall, and the queen established posts and garrisons from distance to distance; every three miles a post
and an important garrison, and in the intervals, from mile to mile, weaker garrisons. To each post were
assigned salaried men who had order to watch with bells. If they saw come on their side someone who inspired
them some fear, they warned one another by means of these bells, and in this way, at the

[PDF p. 612]

same hour, everyone was warned and knew from what side came the enemy. Thus was established the surveillance
and, thanks to this method, Egypt was protected against those who would have wished to attack it. Daloukah
achieved the construction of her rampart in six months, and it is this rampart that bears in Egypt the name of
"Wall of the Old Woman." There remain important vestiges of it in the Said. And God is the most knowing!

[PDF p. 613]

CHAPTER XXXVI
OF THE TRIBUTE (BAQT)

One calls baqt the quantity of slaves that the Nubians had to bring each year, as tribute, into Egypt. It is
indeed an Arab word and one employs it regarding the soil. [bt] (rental, by means of a due in kind, of a
kitchen-garden or a prairie), that is, a small portion of prairie and, in the circumstance, "a small quantity
of wealth." One employs still this word, for example when one says regarding the Benou Tamim [...] (fraction
of the Rabi'at); there it has the sense of branch, of section; it would signify then a "portion or a fraction
of the goods." From there the expression [...]; piece of land, part of a thing. One calls also [baqt] the
quantity of grains that one gives, the third, the quarter. It is also the name that one gives to the fruits
that, during the gathering, fall beside the basket. In the case that occupies us, the word would signify
therefore "a portion of what the Nubians possess." One received this tribute from the hands of the Nubians,
at the village of El Qasr, situated five miles from Assouan, between Philae and Nubia, and which is a little
port. This due was imposed for the first time on the Nubians, in the time of the emir 'Amr ben El 'As who,
after the conquest of Egypt, had sent into Nubia, in the year 20 [21 December 640 to 9 December 641], or
according to others, in the year 21 [10 December 641 to 29 November 642], Abd allah ben Sa'd ben Abou Sareh
with an army of twenty thousand men. 'Abd allah, after a sojourn fairly long in Nubia, received from 'Amr a
letter ordering him to return. After the death of 'Amr, the Nubians violated the treaty concluded between
them and 'Abd allah ben Sa'd. They made numerous incursions into the Said, devastating and ruining the
country. Abd allah ben Sa'd ben Abou Sareh, then emir of Egypt for the caliph Othman, undertook against them
a second expedition, in the year 31 [24 August 651 to 11 August 652] and besieged them in the town of
Dongola. The siege was conducted roughly and engines of war, unknown to the Nubians, launched against the
town stones that destroyed the church, at the

[PDF p. 614]

[OF THE TRIBUTE (BAQT), continued]

great stupor of the inhabitants; their king Qalidourouth asked for peace; humble, sad, and miserable, he went
to 'Abd allah. The latter came to meet him, raised him up, and, having had him placed near him, concluded
peace under the condition that each year the Nubians would deliver three hundred sixty slaves. 'Abd allah
engaged himself on his side to give him the quantity of grains necessary to the Nubians, for the king had
complained that the dearth desolated his country. And he wrote for them a letter of which here is the copy. We
pass over the salutations: "Convention established by the emir 'Abd allah ben Sa'd ben Abou serah in favor of
the chief of the Nubians and of all the people of his kingdom; this convention concerns all the Nubians,
great and small, from the frontier of the territory of Assouan to the frontier of the country of Alouah. 'Abd
allah ben Sa'd accords them pardon, and a truce will remain between them and the Muslims who neighbor them, as
well those of the Said as the others, as well as the protected persons of Islam. O Nubians, you will be under
the guarantee of God and of his apostle, the prophet Mohammed; we will not make war on you, we will stir up
no war against you, we will make no incursions on your lands as long as you conform to the treaty passed
between us and you: If you enter into our country, you will only pass through it and will not sojourn there;
we likewise, if we enter into your country, will only pass through it and will not sojourn there. You will
have to protect every Muslim or ally of the Muslims who is established in your country or will pass through it
as a traveler, until he has left you. You will be held to return every slave of the Muslims who will have
taken refuge with you; you will bring him back to Muslim land, will not retain him, and will raise no
difficulty on his subject. You will prevent no Muslim from going where it pleases him and from coming back
from it, until he has accomplished his design. You are held to guard the mosque raised by the Muslims in one
of the quarters of your town; you will prevent no one from praying there; you will have it swept, you will
maintain there the necessary lighting, and will make there the indispensable repairs. Each year, you will
deliver to the imam of the Muslims three hundred sixty slaves chosen among the slaves of your country. These
slaves, males and females, must be without any blemish; there must not be found in the number either old man,
or old woman, or child not having reached the age of puberty. These slaves will be remitted to the vali of
Assouan.

[PDF p. 615]

The Muslims will owe you no aid against the enemies who might attack you and will not be held to defend you
against them, and this from the frontiers of the country of Alouah to the frontiers of the territory of
Assouan. If you give asylum to a slave of the Muslims, if you kill a Muslim or an ally of the Muslims, if you
destroy the mosque raised by the Muslims in a quarter of your town, if you retain anyone of the three hundred
slaves, you will lose the benefits of the treaty and of the convention established between us. We refer
ourselves to the decision of God, who is the best of judges, but we take as witness of our engagement God and
his apostle Mohammed. On your side, you attest of the sincerity of your promises, what your religion
designates to you as the most venerable, the Messiah, his disciples, and all those whom your religion orders
you to venerate. May God be still between us and you. Written by 'Amr ben Sharhabil, in the month of Ramadan
of the year 31 [16 April to 15 May 652]."

Before the rupture of the first treaty, the Nubians had, at the moment when they had acquitted themselves of
the due, made a gift to 'Amr of forty slaves; but 'Amr had refused them and had returned the present to the
functionary charged with the baqt, one named Samqous, who, with the money he made of it, bought victuals and
wine that he sent to the Nubians. 'Abdallah ben Sa'd had reach them also what had been agreed in the way of
wheat, barley, lentils, stuffs, and horses. This fashion of proceeding became definitive and was repeated
each year; at the moment of the delivery of the baqt, the Nubians received the supplementary victuals and
sent the forty slaves that they had primitively offered to 'Amr and that the vali of Egypt retained.
According to Abou Khalifah Hamid ben Hesham El Bohtari, the treaty concluded with the Nubians imposed on them
the obligation to deliver three hundred sixty slaves to the Muslims and forty slaves to the sovereign of
Egypt; one remitted them in exchange a thousand ardebs of wheat and three hundred ardebs more for the
delegates of the king of Nubia; same quantities for the barley; a thousand jars of wine for the king and
three hundred jars for his delegates; two horses of the species employed by the emirs; a hundred pieces of
stuff of every kind; four pieces of qabati stuff for the king and three for his delegates; eight pieces of
boqtoriah stuff; five pieces of striped stuff; an embroidered mantle for the king; ten pieces of the stuff
named shirts of Abou-Boqtor and ten pieces of ahas stuff, which

[PDF p. 616]

is of a very thick tissue. Neither in the book of 'Abdallah ben Ouahb, says Abou Khalifah, nor in that of El
Ouaqedi is the detail of these objects given; I found it in Abou Zakaria. Here is what this author says: "I
heard my father 'Amr ben Saleh speak of these things and I retained what I had heard. He recounted to me this:
I was one day present at the Council of the emir 'Abdallah ben Taher, who was governor of Egypt and who said
to me: 'Is it you Othman ben Saleh, of whom we have had information taken on the subject of the baqt of the
Nubians?' 'Yes,' I answered. Mahfouz ben Soliman approached and said: 'Things happen in this country in a
singular fashion; we send them to ask for information on subjects they know, we have also sent to this sheikh
and none of them has been able to enlighten us.' 'May God accord his peace to the emir,' I cried; 'what
interests you on the subject of Nubia, I can tell it to you. I hold this information from old men to whom it
had been given by other old men who were present at the treaty and the convention passed between 'Abdallah ben
Sa'd and the Nubians.' Then I told him all that I had learned myself. As he disapproved of the article of the
wines, I said to him: 'Like you, 'Abd El 'Aziz ben Merwan disapproved of it.'" This reunion took place at
Fostat Masr in the year 211 [13 April 826 to 1 April 827], at the moment when had just been signed the treaty
with 'Abdallah ben El Seri ben El Hakem El Temimi, emir of Egypt before 'Abdallah ben Taher. The emir, added
Othman ben Saleh, sent to seek information at the divan that was then installed outside the mosque of Masr;
one sought there the documents relative to the affairs of Nubia, and one found them such as I had reported
them; the emir was very satisfied with it.

Malek ben Anis is of the opinion that the treaty applies to all Nubia to the country of Alouah, and that it
was consequently forbidden to buy slaves there; his contemporaries, however, such as 'Abdallah ben 'Abd El
Hakem, 'Abdallah ben Ouahl, El Leith ben Sa'd, Yezid ben Abou Habib, and others still among the Egyptian
jurists, are of a different opinion. "We know," says El Leith ben Sa'd, "the peoples of Nubia better than
Malek ben Anis knows them. We have engaged ourselves not to make incursions on their territory, but we must
not aid them against their enemies. All that has been reduced to slavery for the king or that has become
slave following the incursions they make among one another, we can legally

[PDF p. 617]

buy it, but the purchase of slaves carried off by the Muslims is illegal." Many Muslims had then for
concubines Nubian girls. The Nubians therefore paid each year the baqt, and one gave them in exchange what I
have enumerated above; it was thus until the reign of the emir of the believers El Mo'tasem billah Abou Ishaq
ben El Rashid. Nubia was then governed by Zakaria ben Bahnès (Johannès?). At this epoch, the Nubians finding
themselves in the impossibility of acquitting the baqt, the Muslim emirs pushed against them the peoples of
the vicinity and prevented one from furnishing them victuals. Firqi, son of the king Zakaria, made reproaches
to his father for obeying another king, setting forth to him that, moreover, it was impossible to pay the
tribute claimed. "What do you want to do?" asked the father. "Unite ourselves against them," he answered,
"and make war on them." "Our ancestors," said the king, "judged it good to consent to this tribute and I fear
that you will soon, you too, be of the same opinion. Before you undertake the war against the Muslims, I am
going to send you as ambassador to their king. You will be able thus to compare their situation to ours. If
you are of the opinion that we are capable of it, we will make war on them; if not, ask the king to treat us
the best possible." Firqi went therefore to Baghdad. On his passage, the countries adorned themselves with
their ornaments; he traversed the towns. To him had joined himself the cortège of the chief of the Bedjahs
and both went to Mo'tasem. They were marveled at what they saw in Iraq: numerous armies, admirable edifices;
all that surpassed by far all they had seen on the road. Mo'tassem had Firqi come to him, treated him in a
friendly and magnificent manner. He accepted the presents he brought him and made him much more considerable
ones. "Ask me what you want," he said to him. El Firqi asked him the setting at liberty of the prisoners. El
Mo'tassem consented to it, and as Firqi inspired him esteem, he gave him the house where he had lodged in
Iraq; moreover, he had bought for him a house in all the towns where he was to stop on the road, for Firqi
during his voyage had refused to lodge at anyone's home in Egypt. He had reserved for him a house at Ghizeh
and another in the quarter of the Benou Waïl. He assigned him, on the Treasury of Egypt, a salary of seven
hundred dinars, a horse with its saddle and its bridle, a magnificent sword, a robe brocaded with gold, a
turban of silk, a tunic and a mantle of linen, a certain number of robes for the delegates of Nubia, the
whole to be delivered at the moment when the baqt would arrive in Egypt. The functionary charged with

[PDF p. 618]

the reception of the baqt received a robe of honor, and a certain allocation, to be paid by the Nubians, was
attributed to all those who were employed in the reception of this tribute. What these employees received in
surplus was considered as a present, and they were held to make in their turn a present of equal value. El
Mo'tassem examined what the Muslims paid and found that it was worth more than the baqt itself; he refused
therefore to accord the wine, the grains, and the stuffs of which we have given above the enumeration, and
decided that the baqt would be paid every three years; he wrote on this subject a letter that has remained in
the hands of the Nubians. The king of Nubia having complained that some inhabitants of Assouan had bought
domains of his slaves, El Mo'tassem had the affair examined. The vali of the province and a judge, chosen
among the magistrates of the town, had appear the Nubians who had sold the terrains in question and
questioned them on the sale of which their master had complained. But they protested and said: "We are only
his subjects," and the complaint of the king was set aside. This sovereign having asked also that the
garrison established at El Qasr, in Nubian territory, be withdrawn and established at the frontier that
separates Nubia from the country of the Muslims, one refused it him. And the baqt continued to be remitted,
following the new decision, and one paid to the Nubians what El Mo'tassem had decided, until the advent of the
Fatimites in Egypt. That is what the historian of Nubia recounts. For his part, Abou-l Hassan El Masa'oudi
expresses himself thus: The baqt comprises a certain quantity of slaves that are brought each year into Egypt
and represent the tribute imposed on the Nubians by treaty concluded between them and the Muslims: this
tribute is composed of three hundred sixty slaves destined for the Treasury, forty slaves for the emir of
Egypt, twenty slaves for the lieutenant of the emir at Assouan, specially charged with the perception of the
tribute, five for the judge of Assouan who assists the emir in the reception of the baqt, twelve for the
twelve witnesses chosen among the inhabitants of Assouan to assist the judge in the reception of this
tribute; the whole following the regulation established at the beginning of Islamism, at the epoch of the
first convention intervened between the Muslims and the Nubians. In his book of the Conquests, El Baladeri
says: The tribute imposed on the Nubians comprised four hundred slaves; in exchange, one remitted them
victuals -- that is, grains. The emir of the believers El Mahdi Mohammed ben Abou Ga'far El Mansour fixed the
due at three hundred sixty slaves and a giraffe.

[PDF p. 619]

[OF THE TRIBUTE (BAQT), continued]

In the year 694 [27 June 1275 to 14 June 1276], the atrocities committed by Daoud, king of Nubia, multiplied.
He advanced as far as the vicinity of Assouan and burned a crowd of markets, after having ravaged 'Aïdhab.
The vali of Qous marched against him, but could not rejoin him; his cavalry, however, succeeded in seizing a
great number of Nubians. One sent them to the sultan El Melek El Zaher Beïbars El Bondoqdari, at the citadel
of the mountain, where they were sawed between two planks. Skandah, nephew of the king of Nubia, having come
to complain of his uncle Daoud, the sultan sent him with the emir Shams El din Aqsonqor El Faraqani El
Ostadar, the emir 'Az El din Aïbek El Afram, chief of the Treasury, and a numerous army comprising the
regular soldiers, the troops of the provinces, the Bedouins of the South, pikemen, archers, grenade-throwers.
The expedition set out from Cairo the first day of Sha'ban [20 January 1276] and entered into Nubia. The
Nubians went to meet the Egyptian army, mounted on rapid camels, brandishing their javelins and clad in long
black tunics. The two armies delivered each other a fierce combat where the Nubians were put to flight. El
Afram marched rapidly on the citadel of Derr, killed there a great number of inhabitants, and led away a
great quantity of slaves. El Faraqani, on his side, had penetrated into Nubia by land and by water,
massacring or making prisoner all he met, and had carried off a considerable crowd of herds. He stopped in
the island of Mikaïl, at the foot of the cataract, and had his boats conducted across the cataract. The
Nubians fled into the islands. El Faraqani wrote to Qamar el Daoulah, lieutenant of Daoud, king of Nubia, and
accorded him pardon. The latter swore obedience to Skandah and recalled to him the inhabitants of the Maris
and the Nubians, who had taken flight. El Afram, however, had passed the river by ford and put the siege
before a fort situated on the bank of the Nile; he seized it and killed there two hundred men and made
prisoner a brother of Daoud. The latter took flight, pursued for three days by the Egyptians who did not
cease to kill and to make prisoners. Finally the people made their submission; the wife and the sister of
Daoud were prisoners, but Daoud himself had been able to escape. Skandah was named king in the place of
Daoud and took of himself the engagement to give in tribute each year three elephants, three giraffes, five
female leopards, a hundred russet camels, and four hundred oxen of choice. It was established that the
territory

[PDF p. 620]

of Nubia would be divided into two parts, one destined for the sultan and the other reserved for the upkeep
and the guard of the country; the district of the cataracts, immediate neighbor of Assouan and forming about
the quarter of Nubia, would be entirely the property of the sultan who would receive the dates, the cotton,
and the other dues that the district paid since the most ancient time. The inhabitants remaining Christian
were submitted to the capitation; each adult man had to pay per year a dinar of silver cash. One drew up a
formula of solemn oath that was sworn by Skandah and that of another oath sworn by his subjects. The two
emirs destroyed the churches of the Nubians and took what they contained; they had delivered to themselves
twenty Nubian emirs and delivered the Muslims of Assouan and of Aïdhab whom the Nubians retained prisoners.
Skandah placed on his head the royal crown and sat on the throne after having promised and sworn to remit to
the sultan the money and the livestock of Daoud as well as those of the people who had been killed or made
prisoner, the whole at the same time as the ancient established due -- that is, four hundred slaves and a
giraffe, of which three hundred sixty slaves were destined for the caliph and forty for the lieutenant of the
caliph, in exchange for a thousand ardebs of wheat for the king and three hundred ardebs for the royal
delegates.

[PDF p. 621]

CHAPTER XXXVII
OF THE DESERT OF 'AÏDHAB

For more than two hundred years, the pilgrims of Egypt and of the Maghreb followed, to go to Mecca, no other
road than the desert of 'Aïdhab; they went up the course of the Nile from Fostat Masr to Qous, and from Qous
crossed by camel the desert that separates the Nile from 'Aïdhab. There they embarked on ships that
transported them to Djeddah, the port of Mecca. Inversely, the merchants of India, of the Yemen, and of
Abyssinia arrived by sea at 'Aïdhab, traversed the desert to Qous, and from there went to Fostat. This desert
was ceaselessly furrowed by travelers going and coming, by caravans of merchants and of pilgrims. Bales of
merchandise, cinnamon, pepper, or other commodities, were met abandoned there, without the ascending or
descending caravans touching them, and remained thus until their masters came to seek them. The pilgrims
going to Mecca or coming back from it followed this road for more than two hundred years, from the year 450
[28 February 1058 to 16 February 1059] and some to the year 660 [26 November 1261 to 14 November 1262] and
some -- that is, from the time when the scourges that desolated the country, in the time of the caliph El
Mostanser Billah Abou Tamim Mo'add ben El Zaher, had closed the land road to the pilgrims until the epoch when
the sultan El Melek El Zaher Rokn el din Beïbars El Bondoqdari had made a veil and a key for the Kaabah and
sent by land the caravan of the pilgrimage in the year 666 [22 September 1267 to 9 September 1268]. From then,
the pilgrims frequented less and less the road passing through the desert, which however remained the usual
road of the merchants who had their merchandise transported from 'Aïdhab to Qous. In their turn, they
abandoned this itinerary after the year 760 [3 December 1358 to 22 November 1359], and since this epoch, the
situation of Qous declined. The desert in question extends from Qous to 'Aïdhab over a distance of seventeen
days' march; one remains three and even four days without meeting

[PDF p. 622]

water. 'Aïdhab is a town situated on the shore of the sea of Djeddah; it is without walls and most of its
houses are huts of reeds. It counted formerly among the most important ports of the world, because the ships
of India and of the Yemen disembarked there their merchandise and departed again from it, and because the
pilgrims of Mecca set out from this port or landed there on the return. When the ships of India and of the
Yemen had ceased to stop at 'Aïdhab, the most important port became 'Aden, in the country of the Yemen. 'Aden
conserved this supremacy until the year 820 [18 February 1417 to 7 February 1418] and some, epoch when
Djeddah became the most important port of the world, with Harmouz, whose roadstead is considerable. 'Aïdhab is
situated in a desert where grows no plant. All that one eats there is imported, the water even is brought
there from outside. The pilgrimage and the commerce offered formerly to the inhabitants of 'Aïdhab advantages
without number; for each package belonging to the pilgrims and that they transported, they collected a
determined duty; it is from them that the pilgrims rented the boats that were to conduct them to Djeddah and
bring them back from Djeddah to 'Aïdhab. They amassed thus much money, for there was at 'Aïdhab no one who did
not possess one or several boats, according to his means. In the sea of 'Aïdhab, in the vicinity of the town,
are islands where are installed fisheries of pearls. At a certain epoch of the year, the divers go by boat to
these islands and stay there days and days, then they come back with their harvest; at the fishery, the sea
is very little deep. The life of the inhabitants of 'Aïdhab is like the life of the beasts, and they approach
much more, by their nature, the animals than men. The pilgrims who used their boats to cross the sea ran
serious dangers; most of the time the winds pushed them toward ports situated in distant deserts, on the side
of the South. The natives (?) descended from their mountains, to rent them camels, and led them into
solitudes without water; most of these unfortunates died of thirst, and the natives took from them all they
possessed. Some lost their way and died of thirst. Those who managed to escape arrived at 'Aïdhab, similar to
dead drawn from their shrouds, so much was their body emaciated and their face changed. Most of the pilgrims
died

[PDF p. 623]

in these ports; those who had a favorable wind landed at the port of 'Aïdhab, but it was the minority. The
boats destined to transport the pilgrims on the sea were constructed without any nail; the planks were sewn
with qanbar, a thread drawn from the coconut tree, and one caulked them with fiber of date-palm that one
impregnated with grease and oil of castor, or with oil of qorsh; the qorsh is an enormous fish of the sea
that devours the drowned; the sails of these boats are made of leaves of moql. The people of 'Aïdhab treated
the pilgrims in an abominable fashion. They filled the boats and piled the passengers one on top of another,
and this with the aim of gaining more money. If anyone of the pilgrims fell into the sea, they hardly
preoccupied themselves with it and contented themselves with saying: "We watch over the planks, let the
pilgrims watch over the souls!" The inhabitants of 'Aïdhab are Bedjahs of nation and obey a native king; they
have however a vali who governs the country for the sultan of Egypt. I met their cadi at Cairo; he was a
Black. The Bedjahs have neither religion nor justice. Among them, the men and the women are constantly naked
and wear a rag of stuff on their natural parts; many even do not veil these parts. There is at 'Aïdhab a
torrid heat, and there blows there a burning wind, the Simoum.

[PDF p. 624]

CHAPTER XXXVIII
OF THE TOWN OF LOUQSOR

It is one of the important towns of the Said; it is inhabited by the Marisi, and it is from this country that
come the asses named marisiah.

[PDF p. 625]

CHAPTER XXXIX
OF BALIANA

This [town also forms part of the province of the Said]. El Kamal El Edfaoui reports that, difficulties having
arisen between the vali of Qous and the inhabitants of the province, the latter went to Cairo and obtained
the dismissal of the vali and his replacement by another functionary. The imam of Baliana set out with the
former governor who was going to his domain of Erment, and when they arrived there, the population came to
bring him as a gift of welcome sixty different dishes all prepared with milk. "Is it thus in your country?"
asked the former vali of the imam. "At my home," he answered, "one gives also cakes." On arriving at Akhmim,
the imam set out again for Baliana and, at the moment when the vali arrived in this last town, one brought
him sixty dishes of cakes, and sixty other dishes. On a certain feast day, an inhabitant of the place had
composed twenty-five verses in praise of one of the judges of the town, and there were there people who were
not satisfied to hear the cadi praised, and others whom their situation prevented from manifesting their
opinion. There were in this country numerous sugar-presses and the inhabitants distinguished themselves by
their generosity.

[PDF p. 626]

CHAPTER XL
OF SAMHOUD

This town is situated on the western bank of the Nile. El Edfaoui says that there were at Samhoud seventeen
mills for pressing the sugarcane, and one claims that the rats do not attack the canes of the country.

[PDF p. 627]

CHAPTER XLI
OF ARGENOUS

This town forms part of the province of Bahnesa; outside the town is a church that contains a well named
"well of Siros," a well of small dimensions for which is instituted a feast that one celebrates the 25th of
Bashans, one of the months of the Copts. During six hours of the day, the water of the well bubbles and
escapes through the orifice, then takes again its first state. The Christians judge of the altitude that the
flood of the Nile will reach each year according to the height to which the water of this well rises above
the soil, and they claim that the regime and the flood of the Nile are entirely linked to this phenomenon.

[PDF p. 628]

CHAPTER XLII
OF ABOU BAT

This town depends also on the province of Bahnesa. There was found there a minaret constructed in such a
fashion that, when someone went up it, it oscillated to the right and to the left, and from the exterior one
realized very exactly the oscillations, in observing the displacement of the shadow on the soil.

[PDF p. 629]

CHAPTER XLIII
OF MELLAWI

This town is situated on the western bank of the Nile, and its territory is renowned for the cultivation of
the sugarcane; there were found there a great number of mills to crush it. The last who occupied themselves
with this cultivation in the country were the children of Fadil who, in the time of El Naser Mohammed ben
Qalaoun, cultivated a thousand five hundred feddans of canes each year. The inspector of the private Treasury
having come in the year 738 [30 July 1337 to 19 July 1338] to examine what they possessed, found among other
things fourteen thousand qantars of candy sugar that one had carried to the magazine of candy sugar of Masr,
without counting the molasses; he obliged them to bring eight thousand other qantars and held them quit. And
there still remained to them, as goods having escaped the inspection, ten thousand qantars of sugar, without
counting what they possessed in slaves, grains, and other things.

[PDF p. 630]

CHAPTER XLIV
OF THE TOWN OF ANSENA

This town is one of the most ancient of the Said of Egypt; it is filled with marvels and possesses, among
other monuments, a circus that served, it is said, as a nilometer and that had been constructed by Daloukah,
one of the sovereigns of Egypt. It had the form of a Persian bonnet and was surrounded by columns as numerous
as the days of the year; all were of dark red granite, and raised one step from one another. The water of the
Nile, at the moment of the flood, penetrated into this circus through an opening, and when the water reached
the point fixed for this epoch, the land of Egypt was suitably irrigated. The king came to sit in this circus
to attend the event, and the people of the court climbed to the summit of the columns and walked on them,
going and coming, then let themselves fall from the top of the columns into the circus filled with water.
According to Abou 'Obeïd El Bakri, Ansena is a locality well known of Egypt. The concubine of the Prophet, she
who was the mother of his son Ibrahim, was originally from a village named Hafan, depending on this town; it
is from there also that were, it is said, the magicians of Pharaoh; it is from there that he had them come on
the day of the rendezvous fixed to meet with Moses. One claims that the crocodiles do not bite on the shore
of Ansena, thanks to a talisman that one has raised there, and that in skirting its territory these animals
turn over on their backs and remain thus until it has passed it. One claims that the constructor of Ansena was
Ashmoun ben Misraïm ben Beïsar ben Ham ben Nouh; the town rises on the bank of the Nile and possessed
magnificent gardens and villas, the fruits and the dates abounded there; today it is no more than a

[PDF p. 631]

heap of ruins. The bang tree, says Abou Hanifa El Dinouri, grows only at Ansena; it is a wood of which one
makes planks for the boats; it occasions frequently bleedings of the nose to those who saw it. A plank of
this wood sells for fifty dinars or thereabouts. If one joins solidly two of these planks and one leaves them
immersed in the water for six days, they form no more than a single one. Ansena had an old rampart that was
demolished by the sultan Salah el din Youssef ben Ayoub (Saladin); each boat going down the river received as
cargo a certain quantity of stones coming from this wall, and thus it was entirely transported to Cairo.

[PDF p. 632]

CHAPTER XLV
OF EL QEÏS

El Qeïs is a locality situated in the vicinity of Behnesa; one even says currently: El Qeïs and El Behnesa.
'Amr ben el 'As, says Ibn 'Abd el Hakem, sent into the Said Qeïs ben El Hareth, who, having reached El Qeïs,
established himself there and gave it his name. According to Ibn Younes, Qeïs ben El Hareth, surnamed at first
El Moradi, then El Ka'bi, is cited by Omar ben El Khattab as one of the bravest men of his time: Souid ben
Qeïs, otherwise called Shedid ben Qeïs ben Tha'leb, speaks of it equally, as well as 'Asker ben Soudah. It is
he who conquered the town of the Said of Egypt called, after him, El Qeïs. One fabricates in this country
stuffs of wool and garments in goat-hair that one finds only in Egypt. Some Egyptians report that when
Moawiah ben Abou Safian had become old, he could not manage to warm himself, and everyone was in agreement
that he could be warmed only by the garments fabricated in Egypt with the hair of the goats of the country,
washed and dyed. One made for him a certain quantity, but he had need of only a single one. One fabricates
also at Qeïs and at Behnesa carpets and tents that bear the name of these localities; they are the most
beautiful looms (manufactures) of the world. One discovered in the surroundings of Behnesa, in the time of
the sultan El Melek El Kamel Mohammed ben el 'Adel Abou Bekr ben Ayoub, an underground lake that the governor
of Behnesa wished to examine; for this, he gathered the most adroit swimmers and the most skillful divers --
that is, more than two hundred persons who all descended into the lake, but could not find the bottom of it
nor the banks. The governor then had constructed a boat long and narrow that could be introduced through the
orifice of the underground; one embarked there provisions and men, and one placed there cords attached by one
extremity to posts placed at the opening of the underground; the men were provided with instruments destined
to make them recognize the hours of the day and of the night, a quantity of torches of wax and other objects
proper to give fire and light. Order was given them to go with the boat into the underground until half of
their provisions

[PDF p. 633]

were consumed. They set out therefore with the boat in the darkness, skirting the cords, but without finding,
during the route, the banks of the lake. They did not cease to advance until seeing the victuals diminish,
and they brought back by the oar the boat toward the entrance of the underground, hauling themselves on the
cords to come back to their point of departure; they arrived at last at the entrance of the underground. They
had navigated on the lake for six days of which four had passed in penetrating into the underground and in
seeking the banks of it; the two other days having been employed for the return; and during all this time
they had not been able to reach the extremity of the lake. The emir 'Ala el din El Tanbagha, vali of Behnesa,
addressed a letter on this subject to El Melek El Kamel who was marveled at the thing; but he could not occupy
himself with it more seriously, the attack of Damietta by the Franks having diverted him from it. But when
the Franks had abandoned Damietta and the sultan had returned to Cairo, he went in person to see the
underground in question.

[PDF p. 634]

CHAPTER XLVI
OF DAROUT BILHASSAH

Darout is the name of three localities: Darout Ashmoum, of the province of Ashmounein; Darout Sarian, of the
province of Ashmounein equally; and Darout Bilhassah of the district of Behnesa in the Said. In this last
town is a mosque raised by Ziad ben El Mogheïrah ben Ziad ben 'Amr El 'Alaki, who died in Moharrem of the
year 191 [17 November to 16 December 806] and was buried in this mosque. It is of him that the poet said:

[verses:] Generosity has made an oath to which it has not failed: that God has created no man like Ziad. He
was, during his life, like a beneficent rain for Egypt and a protection in the years of dearth.

His brother Ibrahim ben El Mogheïrah died in 197 [12 September 812 to 31 August 813], and the poet said of
him:

[verses:] Ibrahim ben El Mogheïrah was made of gold and he became more beautiful as the time passed. If he
had possessed all that is on the earth, he would have quickly given it to the poor without hesitating.

At the death of Ahmed ben Ziad ben El Mogheïrah, in Moharrem of the year 256 [15 July to 13 August 850], one
made for him the following verses:

[verses:] Ahmed is dead, glorious and regretted. Indeed, he was praiseworthy and praised. He received the
glory in heritage from his father and his uncle. After him, no one will resemble him.

[PDF p. 635]

CHAPTER XLVII
OF SAKAR

It is a town of the province of Atfiyeh, facing which opens a valley where one sees still at present an
assemblage of stones representing a camel of the greatest size known and of the most beautiful form. It is
standing on its four feet and looks toward the Orient. On its right thigh is traced an inscription of three
lines in characters particular to the people that edified this camel. At about a hundred fifty paces from this
camel is found a second absolutely similar, but looking at the first; this second camel bears no inscription.
Between the two animals a regular (geometric) figure was formerly covered with stuffs that filled forty boxes
of which twenty were placed on one side and twenty on the other; all that was of stone and those who saw it
could hardly suspect that they were bales of stuffs. At a hundred fifty paces from there was a third camel
similar to the two others; it stood turning its back to the second camel and looking at the mountain in which
opens a second valley. This camel bears no inscription. This was recounted to me by a traveler whose accounts
are not suspect.

[PDF p. 636]

CHAPTER XLVIII
OF MINIET EL KHASIB

This town owes its name to Khasib ben 'Abd el Hamid, intendant of the revenues of Egypt for the emir of the
believers Haroun El Rashid.

[PDF p. 637]

CHAPTER XLIX
OF MINIET EL NASEK

This town, situated in the district of Atfiyeh, owes its name to El Nasek, brother of Bahram El Armeni
(the Armenian), vizier of the Caliph El Hafez li din Allah Abou-l Meïmoun 'Abd el Megid ben Mohammed. In 529
[23 October 1134 to 10 October 1135], he had been named, by his brother Bahram, vali of Qous; this valiyah
was at this epoch the best of Egypt. El Nasek showed himself very hard for the Muslims and rendered himself
insupportable by his injustice and his cruelty. Thus, when one learned that Radouan ben Lakhsha had replaced
Bahram, when one knew that the latter was in flight and that another occupied in his place the functions of
vizier, the people of Qous threw themselves on El Nasek (month of Gamadi II of 531 [24 February to 24 March
1137]), killed him, and having attached to his foot a dead dog, dragged him through the town and threw him on
a heap of refuse. This El Nasek was a Christian.

[PDF p. 638]

CHAPTER L
OF GIZEH

The word gizeh, says Ibn Siadat, signifies the direction, the side, and makes in the plural [...]. One names
[...] "the sides of a valley," and it is from there that comes the name of Gizeh, given to an important and
richly constructed locality, situated on the western bank of the Nile, opposite Fostat-Masr. Every Sunday,
there is held there a considerable market where are brought from all sides all sorts of merchandise, and
where gathers a great affluence of people. One meets there numerous mosques. The hafiz Abou Bekr ben Thabet
El Khatîb recounts, among other things, the following tradition that he held from Nabit ben Sharit: "The
prophet of God said: Gizeh is one of the gardens of Paradise, and Egypt is the magazine of God on the earth."
The mosque of Toubah, at Gizeh, contained, it is said, the box in which Moses had been exposed by his mother
on the Nile. It is at Gizeh also that is found the palm under which Mary nursed Jesus; it is the only palm
(of the region) that gives fruits.

Ibn 'Abd el Hakem reports, according to Yezid ben Abou Habib, that Hamadan and the other valis of the region
had a preference for the residence of Gizeh. 'Amr ben El 'As having written to 'Omar ben El Khattab to inform
him of what God had done for the Muslims, of the countries he had opened to them, of what had been done for
the distribution of the lands, and of the preference that Hamadan showed for Gizeh, 'Omar answered him
rendering thanks to God for the situation and adding: "How can you show yourself satisfied to be thus distant
from your companions? You cannot permit any of them to be separated from you by a river. You could not foresee
what may happen to them by surprise, and you would be in the impossibility of rescuing them if a catastrophe
arose. Recall them to you, and, if they refuse to obey you and prefer the sojourn of Gizeh to the security
they would find at your sides, let the true Muslims build them a citadel." 'Amr communicated this letter to
the recalcitrants, but they refused to obey.

[PDF p. 639]

[OF GIZEH, continued]

marveled at the situation they enjoyed at Gizeh: it was the same for the members of their family who had
accompanied them, Yafe' and the others; all preferred what they found there. 'Amr ben El 'As therefore had
the citadel of Gizeh built for them; the construction begun in the year 21 was achieved in the year 22 [30
November 642 to 18 November 643]. According to what is recounted, when 'Amr ben El 'As asked those of Gizeh
to return to Fostat, they would have answered: "We have marched in the vanguard on the road of God; we will
not leave our post for another." And Yafe' installed himself at Gizeh where were already Mobrah ben Shehab,
Hamadan, the Dhu Asbah and, among them, Abou Shamr ben Abrahah and a fraction of the tribe of El Hagar.

According to El Qoda'ï, when 'Amr ben El 'As, returning from Alexandria, stopped at Fostat, he posted a part
of his troops at Gizeh, for he feared on this side an attack of the enemy. In consequence, he established at
Gizeh the family of Dhu Asbah, of the Himyarites, a family very numerous, and Yafe' ben Zeïd, of the
Ra'ïnites. He installed there also Hamadân, as well as a fraction of the Azdis, descendants of El Hagar ben El
Habou ben El Azd, and another fraction of the Habeschat who depended administratively on the Azdis. At his
departure from Gizeh, 'Amr gave the order to all those who were there to leave with him; but this was
disagreeable to them, and they answered: "It is here the point to which we have come in marching in the
vanguard on the road of God; we have established ourselves here and refuse to leave it, for we have been here
for months." 'Amr therefore wrote on this subject to 'Omar ben El Khattab, and informed him of the intention
that Hamadan, the families of Dhu Asbah and of Yafe', and their companions had of staying at Gizeh. To which
'Omar answered: "How can you consent to be separated from your companions and to leave a river between them
and you? It is impossible for you to foresee what unfortunate thing may happen to them, while you would be
incapable of carrying them rescue. Recall them to you and do not remain separated. If they refuse to obey and
prefer to stay where they are, build them a citadel suitable for a troop of Muslims." 'Amr gathered the
interested parties and read them the letter of 'Omar; but they refused to leave Gizeh, and 'Amr gave the
order to build them a citadel. This too displeased them: "We can," they said, "have no better ramparts than
our swords." Hamadan and Yafe' not being

[PDF p. 640]

in agreement, 'Amr drew lots between them, and the lot fell on Yafe' who built them the imposed citadel in
the year 21 and achieved its construction in the year 22. 'Amr then had proceeded with the division of the
lands. The Dhu Asbah of the Himyarites had the portion that extends from the Orient to the Occident to the
plowed and cultivated terrains; they refused to let the citadel be built on their territory. The share of
Yafe' ben el Haretz, of the tribe of Ra'ïn, occupied the center of Gizeh; it was on his terrain that he raised
the citadel; but a part of his tribe, refusing to be thus protected, left the place and went to establish
itself on the territory of Bekil ben Gachem ben Nouf ben Hamadan, to the southeast of Gizeh; Hachet ben
Gachem ben Nouf was established to the northwest. The Giaouyah benou 'Amer ben Bekil and the Benou Hagar ben
Arhab ben Bekil had as their share the portion that faces the qibla. The Benou Ka'b ben Malek ben El Hagar
ben El Habou ben El Azd occupied the free place between Bekil and Yafe'. As for the Habechat, they spread
themselves into the greatest arteries of the town.

The mosque of Gizeh was constructed by Mohammed ben 'Abd allah the Treasurer, in Moharrem of the year 350
[error for 380 -- 20 February to 21 March 961], by order of the emir 'Ali ben El Ikhshid. El Kafour seconded
the Treasurer in his construction and procured the funds necessary for the edification and the upkeep of the
mosque. Previously, the inhabitants of Gizeh did their devotions in the place of prayer of Hamadan which is
the oratory of Morâheq ben 'Amer ben Bekil and where gathered all the inhabitants of Gizeh. The construction
of this mosque was executed concurrently by the Treasurer and by Abou-l Hassan ben Abou Ga'far El Tahaoui. As
one had need of columns for the mosque, the Treasurer went during the night to the church of the province,
removed the columns which he replaced by pillars, and transported them to the mosque. Carried away by zeal,
Ibn El Tahaoui declared that, from then on, it was no longer licit to pray there. According to what El Yemani
reports, Ibn El Tahaoui went to pray in the old mosque of Fostat, of which several columns and several marbles
came from the churches of Alexandria and of the diverse provinces of Egypt. A part of this mosque had been
built by Qosrah ben Sherik, governor delegated by El Oualîd ben Abd el Melek. One recounts that at Gizeh is
found the tomb of Ka'b el Ahbar and that one saw there also stones and plaques of marble on

[PDF p. 641]

which were represented crocodiles; and none of these animals showed itself in the Nile for three miles
upstream and downstream of the town. In 724 [30 December 1323 to 17 December 1324] El Melek El Naser Mohammed
ben Qalaoun forbade his vizier to touch anything of what came from the revenues of Gizeh; all was carried to
the sovereign.

[PDF p. 642]

CHAPTER LI
OF THE PRISON OF JOSEPH

The prison of Joseph, says El Qoda'ï, is at Bousir, in the province of Gizeh; all the instructed Egyptians are
in agreement on this point. One finds in this locality the traces of two prophets: one of them, Joseph, was
imprisoned there for a time estimated at seven years, and it is there that the inspiration descended on him.
The terrace of the prison is known under the name of agabat el da'a (response to the call): it is reported
that Kafour El Ikhshidi having asked Abou Bekr ben El Haddad where was the agabat el da'a to make there the
call, Abou Bekr designated him the terrace of the prison. The other prophet is Moses, but one has raised, on
the vestiges (of the monument recalling) the latter, a mosque that one designates under the name of Mosque of
Moses. Abou-l Hassan Ali ben Ibrahim El Sharfi (he was of El Sharf) recounted to us what follows: "Abou
Mohammed 'Abd allah ben El Ouard, whose sister had died leaving him her heritage, and whose advice we always
followed, found himself at the prison of Joseph at the epoch when it was still a goal of promenade for the
people. Now, one day, he said to us: 'O my friends, here is the time to go to the prison, let us go there
then.' And, taking out ten dinars, he held them out to his companions, adding: 'If you desire something, buy
it.' The companions cited in the account bought what pleased them and we went on Sunday to Gizeh and passed
the night at the mosque of Hamadan. The next morning, we went on foot to the mosque of Moses, which is
situated in the plain and from which one must climb to go to the prison. This is separated from the mosque by
all the height of a considerable hill of sand. The old man then said to us: 'To the one who will carry me and
take me up to the prison, I will tell an account that I will tell no longer to anyone until my soul leaves
this world.' El Sharfi decided himself, took the Sheikh, and carried him to the summit of the hill. As soon
as he was set on the ground, the Sheikh said to him: 'Have you any paper?' 'No,' answered El Sharfi. 'Lead me
near a flagstone,' said the Sheikh. And, taking a coal, he wrote: Yahia ben Ayoub, who held it from Yahia ben

[PDF p. 643]

Bekir, who held it from Zeïd ben Aslam ben Yesar, who held it from Ibn 'Abbas, recounted to me that Gabriel
came to find Joseph in this prison, in this tenebrous sojourn, and that Joseph said to him: 'Who are you?
Since I entered into my prison, I have seen no face more beautiful than yours.' 'I am Gabriel,' answered the
angel, and Joseph set about weeping. 'Why do you weep, O prophet of God?' asked Gabriel. 'What does Gabriel
come to do in the sojourn of the criminals?' 'Do you not know that God purifies such sojourns by means of his
prophets? Through you God has purified the prison and all that touches it. As for me, I will not rise until
the end of the day; only then will I come out of the prison.'" Between Yahia and Zeïd, says el Qoda'ï, a link
is missing. The fiqih Abou Mohammed Ahmed ben Mohammed ben Salamat El Tahaoui, speaking of the prison of
Joseph, says: "If a man comes from Iraq with the aim of visiting it and praying there, I will not reproach him
his voyage." The fiqih Abou Ishaq El Marouzi says: "If a man comes from Iraq to visit it, I will not reproach
him for having undertaken the voyage."

In his chronicle of the month of Rabi' I of the year 415 [13 May to 11 June 1024], El Messihi reports that the
crowd and the populace traversed the markets of Cairo, to the noise of the drums and the trumpets, claiming
from the merchants and the notables of the markets the money necessary to go to the prison of Joseph. And the
merchants refused: "Our situation is too hard," they said, "for us to be able to satisfy you." The victuals,
indeed, sold at exorbitant prices. In consequence, these merchants went to complain to His Purity -- that is,
the emir of the believers El Taher li 'azaz din allah Abou-l Hassan Aly ben Hakem bi 'amr allah, who gave to
the lieutenant of the kingdom, Abou Taher ben Kafi, commander of the lower police, instructions according to
which one was to oblige the merchants to pay the habitual due of each year. At the same time order was given
to the crowd to go to the prison of Joseph, with the promise that they would receive that year an indemnity
equal to that of the preceding years. They set out therefore and on the Saturday, 9th of Gamadi I [19 July
1024], the grand Caïd 'Ezz El Daoulah, escorted by all the Turks and the principal chiefs, traversed the town
and went with his troop to El Sana'at on the dike. From there he passed with all the army to Gizeh and came
to support the troops left there in garrison by the emir. The latter crossed in his turn the river, the

[PDF p. 644]

[OF THE PRISON OF JOSEPH, continued]

Monday 11th of the month [21 July 1024], with four boats and fourteen transport mules. All those who were
with him, particular guard and personnel of the harem, went thus to the prison of Joseph. The emir stayed
there two days, and when the populace that had come to the prison had returned, reciting parables, jokes,
stories, and licentious tales that diverted him much and rendered him very indulgent, he regained his castle
where he reentered the Wednesday 13th of the month [23 July 1024].

The populace of the markets continued for nearly two weeks to traverse the town carrying scarecrows, hideous
objects, statues, and they went thus to Cairo to show them to the emir of the believers. They came back
provided with a firman of the emir prescribing to bring no impediment to their comings and goings, to show
oneself generous toward them, and to protect them. And the promenade did not cease until all had been
gathered. They came back from the prison of Joseph the Saturday 14th of Gemadi I [24 July 1024]. They
traversed the streets with masks, grotesque objects, and recounting stories. That day no one could work nor
earn his living. An enormous crowd pressed into the markets to see them; almost everyone did the same during
all the day. There was given to them all eight thousand dirhems; there were gathered there the people of
twelve markets who all withdrew satisfied.

Outside Gizeh is a locality that bears the name of a certain Abou Harirah. Those who are not informed imagine
that it is a matter there of Abou Harirah El Sahebi (the Companion); it is nothing of the kind; the one that
occupies us is the son of the daughter of the latter.

[PDF p. 645]

CHAPTER LII
OF THE VILLAGE OF TERSA

It is reported, says El Qoda'ï, that El Qasem, son of Obeïd Allah ben El Hagab, intendant of the revenues of
Egypt for Hesham ben 'Abd El Melek, built on the territory of Gizeh a village named Tersâ. And this El Qasem,
having gone to Cairo, was named, after his father Obeïd Allah ben El Hagab El Selouli, vali of the revenues
under the caliphate of El Hesham ben 'Abd El Melek. Then Hesham named him intendant of these same revenues,
when his father was designated to the post of governor of Ifriqiah in the year 116 [10 February 734 to 30
January 735]. He remained there until the year 124 [15 November 741 to 3 November 742], epoch when he left
Masr to join Hafas ben El Oualid with the Arabs and the non-Arabs of the country, and he became vali of the
revenues and of the prayer at once. It is in this village of Tersâ that was delivered the combat against
Haroun ben Mohammed El Ga'edi.

[PDF p. 646]

CHAPTER LIII
OF MINIET ANDOUNAH

It is a village depending on Gizeh, named thus after Andounah, secretary of Ahmed El Modaïni, overseer of the
villages that Mousa ben Bogha possessed in Egypt. Ahmed ben Touloun had this Andounah arrested, who was
Christian and who had to pay fifty thousand dinars.

[PDF p. 647]

CHAPTER LIV
OF OUSIM

According to what Ibn 'Abd El Hakem reports, 'Abd allah ben 'Abd El Melek ben Merwan, emir of Egypt, went to
Ousim, a domain belonging to a Copt. This Copt had asked 'Abd allah to come to visit him at his home,
promising him a hundred thousand dinars, and 'Abd allah ben Merwan had accepted. According to other authors,
it is to the village of Abou-l Nimros that the emir would have gone in the company of a writer named Ibn
Hanzalah. 'Abd allah was destituted and replaced in the valiyah by Qorrat ben Sherik, while he was in this
village. When the news reached him, he rose to put on his underwear and put it on inside out. One says
elsewhere that, when he received the news of his destitution, 'Abd allah gave back the money to his host,
saying: "I am destituted!" 'Abd allah, says another, had gone with his host as far as the ferry and had his
companions pass before him, passing himself last. It is then that was remitted to him the letter announcing
his destitution. The proprietor of the money said then: "By God, you must honor my house; you will be my
guest and you will eat at my table. Certainly, I will keep nothing of this money and will not let you depart."
And he passed with him.

[PDF p. 648]

CHAPTER LV
OF MINIEH 'AQABAH

This village forms part of (the province of) Gizeh and takes its name from 'Aqabah ben 'Amer El Gaheni.
According to the account of 'Abd El Hakem, 'Aqabah ben 'Amer wrote to Mo'awiah ben Abou Sofian, asking him for
a land that he could use, near the village of 'Aqabah. And Mo'awiah accorded him a terrain of a thousand
square cubits. One of the freedmen of 'Aqabah, who was near him, said to him: "God has accorded you a
peaceful land." "It is nothing of the kind," answered 'Aqabah, "for we have six obligations to fulfill: We
must take neither their lands, nor their women, nor their children; we cannot possess more than they; I must
defend them against their enemies and I must watch over it and testify to it." According to another account,
'Aqabah wrote to Mo'awiah, asking him for a terrain in a village to build there houses and dwellings, and
Mo'awiah accorded him a domain of a thousand square cubits. His freedmen and his servants said to him then:
"See the land that suits you, trace it, and build inside it." "That cannot be," answered 'Aqabah; "we must
fulfill six conditions: We can take nothing of their lands; it is not permitted us to possess more than they;
we must not overburden them (with work); one cannot take their children, and one must combat the enemies who
would wish to attack them from behind." Abou Saïd ben Younes says: This land, given as a fief to 'Aqabah, is
the port known under the name of Minieh 'Aqabah, in the province of Gizeh, facing Fostat-Masr.

'Aqabah ben 'Amer ben 'Eisa ben 'Amr ben 'Adi ben 'Amr ben Refa'ah ben Moudou'ah ben 'Adi ben Rhanam ben El
Rabe'ah ben Rashdan ben Qeïs ben Gahinah, such is his genealogy, according to Abou 'Amr El Kandi. El Hafez
Abou 'Omar ben 'Abd el Barr says: 'Aqabah ben 'Amer ben Hassan El Gahini descends from El Gahinah ben Zeïd
ben Mesa'oud ben Aslam ben 'Amr ben El Haf ben Qoda'ah, but one is not in agreement on this genealogy. He was
surnamed Abou Hamad or Abou Ased or Abou 'Amr or Abou Sa'ad or Abou-l Esoued. Khalifah ben Khiat says that
Abou 'Amr 'Aqabah ben 'Amer [...]

[PDF p. 649]

[OF MINIEH 'AQABAH, continued]

El Gahini was killed as a martyr on the day of Nahrwan in the year 38 [9 June 658 to 28 May 659], but it is an
error on his part, for, in a book published subsequently, he says: In the year 58 [3 November 677 to 22
October 678] died 'Aqabah ben Amer El Gahini. 'Aqabah ben 'Amer inhabited Masr of which he was vali; he had
had a house built for himself there and died toward the end of the caliphate of Mo'awiah. The companions of
the prophet, Gaber, Ibn 'Abbas, Abou Amamah, and Mouslimah ben Mokhallad speak of him. As for the accounts
that those who came after have made of him, they are numerous. Then, says El Kandi, 'Aqabah ben 'Amer was
vali for the account of El Mo'awiah, and he united in his attributions the prayer and the revenues; he put
Hamad at the head of his police. 'Aqabah was a reader of the Koran, a fiqih, a theologian, a poet. He is the
author of the Hegrah (the hijra) and of the Victorious Friendship. He was charged with watching over the
yellow mule of the prophet and led it in his voyages. 'Aqabah was replaced in Egypt by Mouslimah ben
Mokhallad, the 10th of Rabi' I of the year 40 [24 July 660]; he had been vali for two years and three months.
According to Ibn Younas, he died at Masr in the year 58 and was buried in the cemetery of the town, at the
Moqattam. He dyed (his hair) black. May God have pity on him!

[PDF p. 650]

CHAPTER LVI
OF HELOUAN

This town takes, it is said, its name from Halouan ben Babelioun ben 'Amr ben 'Amru-l Qaïs, king of Egypt,
son of Seba ben Yashgab ben Ya'rab ben Qahtan, and this Halouan was in Syria, in the vanguard of Abrah Dhu-l
Mounar, one of the Tobba' kings.

The plague, says Ibn 'Abd el Hakem, ravaged Fostat, and 'Abd el 'Aziz ben Merwan left Fostat and stopped at
Helouan, at the entrance of the desert, in a locality named Abou Qarqourah. It is from there that sets out
the spring dug by 'Abd el 'Aziz ben Merwan and brought by him to the palms he had planted at Helouan. Ibn
Khadig sent each day to 'Abd el 'Aziz the news of what occurred in the country, list of the deaths and the
rest. One day, he dispatched a messenger of whom 'Abd el 'Aziz asked: "What is your name?" "Abou Taleb,"
answered the man. This answer shocked and irritated 'Abd el 'Aziz. "I ask you your name," he cried, "and you
answer me: Abou Taleb (Father of the Seeker)! What is your name?" "Moudrik (the one who reaches/dies)," said
the messenger. The emir found the incident of bad augury; after the departure of the messenger, he fell ill
and died. One transported his body to the river to have it go down to Fostat, but, the cadaver beginning to
decompose, one deposited it in a hut on the bank of Maris. There one washed it, one disembarked the cadaver
and with it the censers of aloes that had served to perfume it at the moment of its decomposition. 'Abd El
'Aziz had recommended to transport him, when he would be dead, to the house of Genab ben Moratted ben Zeïd ben
Hani El Ra'ini, commander of his guard and his devoted friend. But Genab himself had died before 'Abd el
'Aziz, and as one arrived with the body of the latter at the door of Genab, the family of Genab, clad in
black, kept itself before the door, lamenting. It followed the body of 'Abd el 'Aziz to the cemetery. A
certain Nasib had received as a present from 'Abd el 'Aziz a village. During his sickness, he had come to see
him; entered near him and struck by the violence of his ill, he set about saying:

[verses:] We visit our Lord and the Lord of the others; would to heaven that the ill had struck us in his
place!

[PDF p. 651]

[verses:] If it were possible to ransom him by any ransom whatsoever, by the Elect! I would have ransomed him
by what I have and what I have had most dear!

'Abd el 'Aziz, having heard him, opened his eyes and had given to him a thousand dinars. The family of 'Abd
el 'Aziz was joyful at it; it rejoiced with him, then he died.

El Kandi recounts: The plague broke out at Masr in the year 70 [25 June 689 to 15 June 690] and 'Abd el 'Aziz
ben Merwan left from it, directing himself toward the Orient. He stopped at Helouan, found the site superb,
appropriated it to himself, installed himself there, and had come the guards, the servants, and the police
commanded by Genab ben Moratted. 'Abd el 'Aziz raised at Helouan dwellings and a mosque; he spread prosperity
and abundance in the region; he planted there his palms and his vines. Ibn Qeïs El Raqiât said:

[verses:] May Helouan be watered, the country of the vines, and what comes out of it in the way of figs and
grapes! Palms long as lances of Bourni move there all together. Black, they are the sojourn of the pigeons
and ceaselessly the crows attack their dates.

The palms being planted and the dates ripe, 'Abd el 'Aziz had the army come to Helouan. He walked about,
looking at the young plants and the streams that watered them. Yezid ben Arouat El Gamali having said to him:
"O emir, will you not say as the servant (of God) said: 'May God will it! There is no force except in God!'"
"Young man," said 'Abd el 'Aziz, "you remind me that one must be grateful. Say this again: We will not make
Yezid lose the hope of receiving ten dinars."

'Abd el 'Aziz was son of Merwan ben el Hakem ben Abou-l 'As ben Ammyah ben 'Abd Shams ben 'Abd Monaf el
Qoreishi El Amaoui Abou-l Asbagh; his mother was Leïlah, daughter of Zeban ben el Asbagh. This is what El
Kandi reports according to Abou Harirah and 'Aqabah ben 'Amer el Gahini. Aly ben Riah, Bahir ben Dakherah,
'Obeïd Allah ben Malek El Khoulani, Ka'b ben 'Alqamah, Thaqah El Nesaï, and Ibn Sa'd report that, when Merwan
marched on Egypt, he sent his son 'Abd el 'Aziz with an army to Aïlah to penetrate into Egypt from this side.
The emir of Egypt, Ibn Gahdam, sent to meet him an army commanded by Zoheir ben Qeïs El Balaoui; the latter

[PDF p. 652]

met 'Abd el 'Aziz at Besaq, on the plateau of the hill of Aïlah; the combat was engaged and Zoheïr and his
army were put to rout. When Merwan was completely master of Egypt, in Gamadi I of the year 65 [14 December 684
to 12 January 685], he remained two months in the country after having instituted his son intendant of the
prayer and of the revenues. "O emir of the believers," said to him on this occasion 'Abd el 'Aziz, "how to
stay in a country where is found none of the sons of my father?" "My son," answered Merwan, "fill the people
with generosities, they will all become for you sons of your father. Let your face be smiling, and their
affection will be acquired to you. Make each of their chiefs understand that he is dearer to you than the
others: he will become for you the spy of his companions, and his clan will march with you. I have given you
for companion your brother Bechr and for vizier Mousa ben Nasir. Who then prevents you, O my son, from
becoming emir of all the earth? Is that not worth more than making locks for your door and weighing yourself
down in your house?" At the moment of leaving Egypt to return to Syria, he said to him again: "I recommend you
to fear always God in the intimacy of your soul as in your exterior acts, for God is with those who show
themselves pious and do good. Take care not to leave to the crier of God the occasion to have hold over you,
for the Muezzin calls to the execution of the divine prescriptions established by God himself who has said:
The prayer is for the believers an obligation at fixed times (Koran, IV, 104). Make no promises to anyone,
unless you keep them, were you for this to have to make war. Do not hasten in the decisions that regard the
government, but rather take counsel. If God had wished to exempt anyone from this obligation, he would
certainly have exempted first of all his prophet Mohammed from the inspirations he sent him. And moreover, God
has said: Take their counsel in your affairs (Koran, III, 153)."

Merwan came out of Egypt at the new moon of Rageb of the year 65 [11 February 685], leaving his son 'Abd el
'Aziz vali of the prayer and of the revenues, and died at the new moon of Ramadan [11 April 685]. His son
'Abd el Melek was recognized as emir. His brother 'Abd el 'Aziz was maintained in his functions and went to
'Abd el Melek in the year 67 [28 July 686 to 17 July 687], after having put at the head of the guard, of the
cavalry, and of the

[PDF p. 653]

satellites Genab ben Moratted El Ra'ïni. The latter affirmed still more the power of his master and, if
anyone showed malevolence for 'Abd el 'Aziz, Genab and his men went to seize him, struck him, and imprisoned
him. 'Abd el 'Aziz was the first who celebrated the feast of Yarafah in Egypt, in the year 71 [15 June 690 to
3 June 691]. The first, says Yezid ben Abou Habib, who sat in the mosque after the 'asr, on the day of
Yarafah, was 'Abd el 'Aziz ben Merwan.

In the year 72 [4 June 691 to 22 May 692], the army of the sea was sent to Mecca to combat 'Abd allah ben
Zobeïr; it was commanded by Malek ben Sharhabil El Khoulani and composed of three thousand men of whom 'Abd
el Rahman ben Bahnes, freedman of Ibn Abza; it was he who killed Ibn El Zobeïr. In 74 [13 May 693 to 1 May
694], 'Abd el 'Aziz went to Alexandria; in 75 [2 May 694 to 28 April 695], he went to visit his brother 'Abd
el Melek; in 77 [10 April 696 to 29 March 697], he demolished completely the mosque of Fostat which he
enlarged on all sides and had struck dinars with effigy. Ibn 'Afir says: 'Abd el 'Aziz had raised each day
around his palace a table of a thousand covers; in addition, he had sent to the tribes a hundred cauldrons
filled with victuals. 'Abd el Melek having written to him to ask him to renounce the heredity of the valiyat,
in order to be able to designate as his successors El Oualid and Soliman, 'Abd el 'Aziz refused and answered
his father (brother): "If you have a son, I have children, I too. May God judge between us!" 'Abd el Melek
entered into a violent anger, and 'Abd el 'Aziz sent him 'Aty ben Riah to enter into negotiations. The
messenger, at his arrival near 'Abd el Melek, attempted to bring his brother back into grace with him; but
'Abd el Melek only recriminated against 'Abd el 'Aziz and cried: "May God separate us!" Ahy continued to
speak to him and ended by appeasing him. Returned near 'Abd el 'Aziz, he rendered him account of the
situation, of his interview with his brother, and of what the latter had said: "May God separate us!" "I will
separate myself therefore from him," cried 'Abd el 'Aziz; "may God, too, separate himself from him -- he who
has never prayed God without his prayer being granted!" "When I came into Egypt, under the emirate of
Mouslimah ben Mokhallad," said 'Abd el 'Aziz, "I wished three things and obtained them: I wished to be vali of
Egypt; to unite the two wives of Mouslimah; and to have Qeïs ben Kalib for chamberlain!" And Mouslimah being
dead,

[PDF p. 654]

[OF HELOUAN, continued]

'Abd el 'Aziz, come into Egypt, was named vali of it; he took Qeïs for chamberlain and married the two wives
of Mouslimah. His son El Asbagh ben 'Abd el 'Aziz died the 21st of Rabi II of the year 86 [21 April 705]. 'Abd
el 'Aziz fell ill in his turn and died in the night of the Monday 13th of Gamadi II of the same year [11 June
705]. One brought him back by the Nile from Helouan to Fostat where he was buried.

Ibn Abou Malikah reports having seen 'Abd el 'Aziz at the moment of his death. "Would to God," he said, "that
I were nothing at all! Would to God that I had been like a plant of the fields or like a pastor of camels in
the depths of the Hedjaz!" At his death, he possessed for all riches only seven thousand dinars, Helouan,
Qisariah, robes of which one mended, horses, and slaves. He had been vali of Egypt for twenty years, ten
months, and thirteen days, and, in the time of Islam, there had not been before a valiyah longer than his.

There was across the Nile, at Helouan, a dike of stones where the horses passed carrying the travelers and
the merchandise from the eastern bank of Helouan to the western bank. And when [there was...] [lacuna in the
manuscript]

[a digression on the compass:] this is still one of the mysteries of nature; for, if of a metallic body such
as iron, copper, silver, lead, gold, tin, one makes a vase, this vase can contain a weight of water more
considerable than the weight of the vase itself; placed (empty) on the surface of the water, it floats and
can support a certain load without being submerged. Now, the travelers who navigate on the sea of India are
sometimes prevented, during the night, from seeing the stars that could guide them by indicating to them the
direction of the cardinal points; thus they carry constantly with them a hollow iron having the form of a
fish and made of very thin plates; they rub the mouth of the fish with a piece of good magnet, and this fish,
placed on the water, turns and presents its head to the south pole and its tail to the north pole. This too is
a mystery of nature. Knowing the two directions north and south, the navigators find easily the orient and
the occident; indeed, he who faces the south and turns his back to the north has the occident on his right
and the orient on his left. When one has determined the four cardinal points, one knows exactly the countries
that are found in each direction, and one marches toward the point one wishes to reach.

[PDF p. 655]

CHAPTER LVII
OF THE TOWN OF EL 'ARISH

The town of El 'Arish is situated between Palestine and Egypt; it is an ancient town, counting among those
that were founded after the Flood.

Master Ibrahim ben Ouacif Shah, speaking of Misraïm, son of Cham, son of Noah, says: He was a delicate young
boy, and, in arriving in the vicinity of Egypt, one raised for him a hut of branches hung with herbs of the
fields. Then one constructed for him, in the same place, a town that one called Darsân -- that is, "Gate of
Paradise." One cultivated, one planted in trees and gardens the space that extended from Darsân to the sea. It
was only a succession of gardens, of prairies, and of dwellings.

Another says: This name was given to it only because Beïsar, son of Cham, son of Noah, had led with him his
four sons, accompanied by their children to the number of thirty, boys and girls. Masr ben Beïsar marched
straight toward the land of Egypt, crossed the frontier of Syria and, after having wandered at random,
arrived in Egypt at the place where was later El 'Arish. He was harassed with fatigue and fell asleep. In a
dream, he saw someone who spoke to him and announced to him his arrival in the blessed land, country of
prosperity, of royalty, and of glory. He awoke, frightened by his dream, and saw himself under a shelter of
branches surrounded by springs of water. He rendered then thanks to God and prayed him to reunite him with
his father and his brothers, and to accord him his benediction on the earth. God granted him and led to him
his family. Together, they arrived at El 'Arish and stopped there. For them, God made come out of the sea
livestock: horses, asses, oxen, sheep, and camels. They pushed before them this livestock and arrived thus at
the town of Menf (Memphis), where they established themselves and built a town named by the Copts Mafat, a
word that means "the town of the thirty." And the posterity of Beïsar multiplied to the point of peopling the
earth; they devoted themselves to agriculture, and their herds were innumerable. It is they who discovered
the mines. One of them discovered even a piece of emerald so big that he could make of it a great table. They
were able to extract nuggets of gold as big as columns or as a lying camel.

[PDF p. 656]

Ibn Saïd reports, according to El Bihaqi, that the meeting of Joseph with his father and his brothers took
place at El 'Arish, the place where the land of Egypt begins. Joseph, indeed, had set out to meet them as far
as this town, extreme limit of his empire. He had there a throne -- that is, a royal bed -- on which he had
his father sit, and it is for this that this town bore formerly the name of El 'Arsh (the Throne). Later this
name was generally pronounced El 'Arish, which has prevailed. Joseph, it is said, had placed guards at all
the exterior points of Egypt, and, when the drought descended on Syria, the brothers of Joseph, set out to go
to provision themselves in Egypt, arrived at El 'Arish. The chief of the guards of this territory wrote to
Joseph, and informed him that the sons of Jacob the Canaanite desired to penetrate into Egypt following the
drought that desolated their country. While waiting for the answer of Joseph, his brothers built themselves a
shelter to guard themselves from the sun, and the place took thus the name of El 'Arish (the Arbor). Joseph
having written and accorded the authorization to pursue their voyage, there happened to them what is reported
in the Koran, where it is said: "On the throne, etc." (Koran, XII, 100), and this is as you see it. And Ibn
Ouacif Shah is the man who knows best the accounts that concern Egypt.

In 415 [15 March 1024 to 3 March 1025], 'Abd Allah ben Edris El Ga'fari, supported by the Benu-l Garrah,
attacked by night El 'Arish, burned it, and carried off all that was there.

In Gamadi II of the year 577 [12 October to 9 November 1181], says the cadi El Fadil, one received the news
that most of the palms of El 'Arish had been cut down by the Franks who had carried off the trunks of them to
their country, that their territory was now filled with them, and that they had found no one to prevent them
from it. We will report still the passage of Ibn 'Abd el Hakem who asserts that, in the time of the Pharaoh
of Moses, the Gofar entirely was extremely prosperous and covered with water, with towns, with dwellings. The
word of God: "We have overturned what Pharaoh and his people had raised" (Koran, VII, 133) would apply
precisely to the works executed in this very place. The country was peopled from this point to the Yemen, and
it is for this that El 'Arish bore the name of 'Arish. It was, it is said, the extreme point of the country of
Syria, and there ended the prairies where pastured the herds of Abraham. It is there that this patriarch had
built himself a shelter where he kept himself to watch over his livestock. Whence the name of El 'Arish given
to this place. It is reported that Malek ben Da'er ben

[PDF p. 657]

Hagr ben Gadilah ben Lakhm had twenty-four children, among whom El 'Arish ben Malek who gave his name to the
country, for he had stopped there and had built a town there. According to Ka'b el Ahbar, one found at El
'Arish the tombs of ten prophets.

[PDF p. 658]

CHAPTER LVIII
OF THE TOWN OF FARMA

El Farma, says El Bekri, is a town that is found in Egypt. Ibn Khalouya, in his book entitled Leïsa, says that
El Farma takes its name from a brother of Alexander, called El Farma and who was an infidel. It is the country
of the mother of Ismaïl, son of Abraham. This name was borne, it is said, by El Farma ben Filiqous whom one
calls also Ibn Filis or Ibn Bilis. Farma was a flourishing town situated on the lake of Tennis; one sees
there the tomb of the physician Galen. El Moutawakel ala allah raised there, on the shore of the sea, a
citadel whose construction was directed by 'Anbassah ben Ishaq, emir of Egypt: this construction was executed
in 239 [12 June 853 to 1 June 854], at the same time as that of the citadels of Damietta and of Tennis. One
spent there considerable sums. When 'Amr ben El 'As had made himself master of Aïn Shams, he sent against
Farma Abrahah ben El Sabah with whom the inhabitants of the town made peace, by means of 500 dinars of
Heraclius, 408 she-camels, and 1,000 sheep. And 'Anbassah, withdrawing from Farma, marched on El Baqarah.

In 343 [7 May 954 to 26 April 955], the Greeks disembarked there; the inhabitants went to meet them and
killed them two men. The Greeks having made a new descent in Gamadi I of the year 347 [21 July to 19 August
958], the Muslims made a sortie, seized one of their ships of which they massacred the crew and led away ten
prisoners.

According to El Ya'qoubi, Farma is the first town of Egypt on the side of the North: the inhabitants there are
very mixed. Between the town and the Green Sea, there is a distance of three miles.

Here is what Ibn El Kandi says: (Among these towns) is Farma, the richest

[PDF p. 659]

[OF THE TOWN OF FARMA, continued]

in marvels, the most abundant in souvenirs of the past. The Egyptians assert that there existed formerly a
terrestrial route leading from Farma to the island of Cyprus, but that this route has been covered by the
sea. In the part thus covered was found, they say, a quarry of variegated marble (white and black); the
quarry of white marble was in Libya.

I made a reconnaissance at Farma, recounts Yahia ben Othman; from the sea to the town there was about a day's
march; the patrols came out of the town and advanced as far as the huts built on the shore of the sea. But
all this space was one day submerged by the waters. According to the account of Ibn Qadid, Ibn Modabher,
finding himself at Tennis, went to Farma to demolish the gates of stone that are to the east of the citadel;
he had need of these stones to make lime. But he had hardly removed one or two stones when the inhabitants
came out in arms to prevent him from it. "This gate," they cried, "is that of which God said to Jacob: O my
children, enter not by a single gate, but by different gates (Koran, XII, 67)." It is at Farma that is seen
the marvelous palm that gives its fruits when in the rest of the world there are no more dates, neither old
nor new. The fruits begin to appear at the normal time when the bunches form on the other palms. And they do
not cease to renew themselves for four months until the moment when the dates appear -- that is, until the
spring. This phenomenon does not occur in any other region, neither at Basra, nor in the Hedjaz, nor in the
Yemen. The palms of Farma give fruits such that a single date weighs more than twenty drachmas and reaches
the length of a span and a fetr.

In his Events of the year 507 [18 June 1113 to 6 June 1114], Ibn El Mamoun El Bataïhi expresses himself thus:
"Fugitives from Syria arrived bearing the news that Baudoin (Baldwin), king of the Franks, had penetrated
onto the territory of Farma. El Afdal ben Emir el Gioush went at once to find the governor of the province of
Sharqieh and asked him to make depart the Markaziah and the Mouqta'in cantoned in his province and to send at
the same time the foot-soldiers of El 'Atoufiah, prescribing to the governor to march himself in person,
after having given instructions for

[PDF p. 660]

the nomad Arabs to set out in the vanguard, in order to attack the Franks during the night and before the
arrival of the reinforcements. The governor, conforming to all these prescriptions, had the tents brought out,
the men and the servants prepared. The army arrived therefore, preceded by the nomads, and charged the
Franks. Baudoin, their king, informed of the arrival of the army and recognizing himself incapable of
resisting, gave his troops the order to pillage, to destroy, to burn, and to demolish the mosques. The mosque
and the oratories were given to the flames as well as the rest of the town, and Baudoin beat in retreat, but
God seized him and, of himself, he threw himself into the fire (of hell). His companions hid his death and
withdrew after having split the body of Baudoin and having filled it with salt, in order to transport it into
his country, where one buried it. As for the Muslim army, after having made some incursions into the enemy
country and having camped under the walls of Ascalon, it reentered Egypt. A letter was addressed to the emir
Zahir el din Tafadkin (Tughtakin), governor of Damascus, prescribing him to march against the country of the
Franks. He went to Ascalon, where one brought him the presents of hospitality and where spread the news of
his arrival. Tafadkin ordered that one remit to him tents, a great number of horses, of mantles, of banners
and of standards, a sword of gold, a belt of gold, a collar of gold, a garment, a great complete tent, a
royal divan, with its carpets, all its utensils and its accessories of silver; he exacted, for Shams el
Khawas, one of the principal chiefs, a gilded robe, a belt of gold, and a sword; for those of the arrivals
who had distinguished themselves, robes and swords. The whole was remitted to the guard of one of the
chamberlains accompanied by two valets who carried the material of the tents. Tafadkin had the great tent
raised and its carpets spread. The vali of Ascalon, as well as Zahir el din and Shams el Khawas and all the
emirs who were at Ascalon or who went there, were to come to the door of the tent to salute him, then would
advance toward the carpet and toward the divan that would be raised. There, the vali, Zahir el din, Shams el
Khawas, and the other chiefs would sit, while the rest of the assistance would remain standing in sign of
veneration and deference. One would remit a robe of honor to Zahir el din and to Shams el Khawas, one would
have them buckle their belts and would gird them with swords; after which each

[PDF p. 661]

of them would distribute robes of honor to those who had distinguished themselves. Then Zahir el din and the
chiefs, accompanied by the gifts they had received, and preceded by the flags and the standards, would go to
the tents that had been prepared for them. And each day the vali, the two emirs, the chiefs, and the soldiers
would go to the royal tent to converse there of all that would matter to the army. And all that was executed.
One made incursions on the enemy territory, one led away prisoners, one fought, and one made a second
distribution of robes of honor. To Shams el Khawas one accorded, as a particular gift for this expedition, a
sum of ten thousand dinars, and Zahir el din received as a gift the great tent and all it contained. He and
his companions received thus the value of thirty thousand dinars.

In the month of Rageb of the year 545 [24 October to 22 November 1150], the Franks made a descent at Farma,
with a considerable army; they burned the town and pillaged the inhabitants. Finally, the vizier Shaour
destroyed it when its vali Moulhem, brother of El Dourghân, came out of it, in the year [...], and it remained
in ruins without ever having been raised since. There were at Farma, at Baqârah, and at Ouàrâdah Arabs of the
tribe of Gedam called Qate'; they had for chief Géra ben 'Ouf ben Mâlek ben Shenouah ben Badil ben Geshm ben
Gezâm. Among them were 'Abd el 'Aziz ben El Ouazir ben Sâbi ben Mâlek ben 'Amer ben 'Adi ben Harsh ben Baqr
ben Nasr ben El Qate', who died in Safar of the year 205 [17 July to 14 August 820]. The Seraoui and Geraoui
have there legends in abundance, legends that we have reported in the book entitled "The Garland of the
Stones of the Necklace" which treats of the chronicles of the town of Fostat. It is there, says Ibn El Kandi,
that is found the reunion of the two seas -- that is, the separation of which God speaks: "He has separated
the two seas that went to meet one another, and between them is a barrier, and they do not confound
themselves" (Koran, LV, 19, 20), and: "He has placed a barrier between the two seas" (Koran, XXVII, 62).
These two seas are the sea of Roum and the sea of China. The barrier that separates them has a length of a
night's march counted from Qolzoum to Farma. And they are nowhere nearer one to the other than at this point.
Everywhere else, there is between them the distance of a month's march.

[PDF p. 662]

CHAPTER LIX
OF THE TOWN OF QOLZOUM

Qolzoum is a town that was on the shore of the sea of the Yemen, at the point of this sea on the side of
Egypt. It is a town of Egypt that has given its name to the sea of Qolzoum. In the vicinity, Pharaoh was
drowned. Between this town and Masr, there are three days' march. Qolzoum has been destroyed and its site
bears today the name of Suez, facing 'Agroud. At Qolzoum, there is neither water, nor trees, nor cultivation.
The water is brought there from very distant wells. There was there formerly a port common to Syria and to
Egypt where one embarked the merchandise destined for the Hedjaz and the Yemen. Between Qolzoum and Faran one
meets neither towns nor villages, but only some plantations of palms where pass the hunters and the
fishermen; it is the same from Faran and Gilan to Aïlah. The country that bears the name of Qolzoum, says Ibn
El Tawir, has remained standing in great part until our days, and the travelers, who go by sea from Egypt to
the Hedjaz, can ascertain it. It was formerly one of the important beaches of Egypt, and I have been able to
see at the depot of the palace the list of a part of its employees and the budget of the expenses for its
vali, its cadi, its muezzins, its scribes, the army that kept garrison there to protect the town and the
surroundings, for its mosque and its oratories; it was a country very prosperous.

El Messihi, in his Events of the year 387 [14 January 997 to 2 January 998], recounts that in the month of
Ramadan [7 September to 6 October 997], the emir of the believers, El Hakem bi 'amr illah, remitted to the
inhabitants of Qolzoum the amount of the duties on the ships. Ibn Khordadabah says, regarding the merchants:
They embark on the western sea, disembark at Farma, and transport on the backs of men their merchandise to
Qolzoum; between these two towns, there is a distance of twenty-five parasangs. At Qolzoum,

[PDF p. 663]

the merchants reembark on the eastern sea and, after a stopover at the trading-posts of Djeddah, go as far as
the Sind, the Hindus, and China. It is at Qolzoum that one takes the land route to go to Aïlah, where one
arrives after a march of six days, for which one must make provision of water. It is said that between
Qolzoum and the sea of Roum there are three stages and that the space that separates the two points forms
what one calls the barrier of which God spoke: "Between them is a barrier that prevents them from mingling"
(Koran, LV, 20).

[PDF p. 664]

CHAPTER LX
OF EL TIH

It is a region situated in the vicinity of 'Aïlah, from which it is separated by a hill that a cavalier had
great difficulty in crossing, so steep was it. The approach of it was facilitated, in the time of Khamaraouyah
ben Ahmed ben Touloun, and the cavaliers make two stages across the desert of Tih properly speaking to arrive
at the shore of the sea of Farân, there where rose the town of this name; it is there that Pharaoh was
drowned. The Tih has a surface of forty square parasangs; the Israelites wandered there for forty years
without entering a town, nor penetrating into a house, nor changing their garments. Moses died there. The
crossing of the desert of Tih is about six days' march. When the Bahri Mamelukes fled from Cairo in 652 [21
February 1254 to 9 February 1255], it happened that one of their bands passed through the desert of Tih and
wandered there for five days. The sixth day, they perceived from afar a black thing and, having approached,
recognized a magnificent town surrounded by walls and porticoes of green marble. They entered into it, made
the tour of it, and found it invaded by the sand that filled the markets and the houses. They discovered
vases and garments, but, when they wished to gather them, these objects, worn by time, fell into dust. In a
vase that they discovered in a merchant's shop, they found nine dinars bearing the image of a gazelle and a
Hebrew inscription. Having dug at this place, they brought to light a stone that covered a cistern filled
with water, and they drank of this water which was colder than ice. Finally they came out of the town and set
out on the road during the night. A troop of Arabs whom they met led them to the town of Karak where, to pay
some small expenses, they presented their dinars. On these pieces of gold was an inscription stating that
they had been struck in the time of Moses. For each dinar one gave them a hundred dirhems and one said to
them: This town is the Green Town, one of the towns of the Israelites, buried under a deluge of sand that
sometimes increases and sometimes diminishes; this town can be seen only by the lost (those who have lost
their way). And God is the most knowing.

[PDF p. 665]

CHAPTER LXI
OF THE TOWN OF DAMIETTE

Damietta is one of the towns of Egypt; between it and Tennis there are twelve parasangs. This town, it is
said, takes its name from Doumiat, a descendant of Ashmoum ben Misraïm ben Beïsar ben Ham ben Nouh. It is
recounted that Edris was the first man on whom descended He who possesses the force and the valiance and who
said to him: "I am God, the modeler of the towns of the world; by my order and by my art, I have reunited the
sweet and the salty, the fire and the ice, and this, thanks to my power and to the certainty of my science of
the dal, the mim, the alif, and the ta." In Syriac, it is said, this ensemble bears the name of Doumiat.
Doumiat is therefore a Syriac word whose root is damtay, "the force designated by the mixture of the sweet
and the salty." Master Ibrahim ben Ouacif Shah says that Damietta is an ancient town, constructed in the time
of Qlimoun ben Atrib ben Qobtim ben Misraïm, and to which one gave the name of a young man whose mother was
the magician of Qlimoun.

When the Muslims advanced against Egypt, Damietta had for governor a man of the family of the Maqoqos, named
El Hamouk. 'Amr ben el 'As having conquered Egypt, El Hamouk held firm in Damietta and prepared himself for
the resistance. 'Amr ben El 'As sent against the town a troop of Muslims commanded by El Moqdad ben El
Asouad. El Hamouk delivered them battle and his son was killed in the combat. He returned therefore to
Damietta, gathered his companions, and asked them counsel on the situation. A sage, who attended the
deliberation, said to him: "O king, the pearl of intelligence has no price, and it is a profit for no one if
one does not walk in the way of victory and of salvation. These Arabs, since they make war, have lost no
flag. They have conquered the countries, subjugated the peoples; no one can do anything against them. We are
not more powerful than the army of Syria, nor more valiant, nor better fortified than it. The Arabs have
always had the victory and the success; thus, my opinion is that you treat of peace with this people and that
it accord us the aman. We will avoid thus the effusion of blood and will obtain protection for our women. You
do not dispose of more

[PDF p. 666]

men than the Maqoqos." Far from yielding to this discourse, El Hamouk entered into a violent anger and had
the orator killed. The latter had a son, instructed and intelligent, whose house was contiguous to the wall
of the town. He went, during the night, to the Muslims and indicated to them the weak points of the place.
The Muslims seized them and fortified themselves there. El Hamouk came out to deliver battle; but he had had
knowledge of the arrival of the Muslims only when these were already masters of the rampart. The son of El
Hamouk, Sheta, seeing the enemies on the wall, ran at them with a great number of his companions. But this
broke the courage of his father who asked the aman of El Moqdad. The town was therefore rendered to the
Muslims. El Moqdad left there a governor and sent to 'Amr ben El 'As the news of the victory. Sheta, who had
converted to Islamism, went to Bourlos, to Damirat, and to Ashmoum Tenah, gathered the people of these
districts, and marched with them as auxiliary of the Muslims against their enemies; with his troops, he
marched, in concert with the Muslims, to the conquest of Tennis, carried a defiance to the inhabitants, and
delivered them a fierce combat in which he was killed as a martyr after having wounded and killed a great
number of enemies. One removed him from the field of battle and buried him in his domain, which bears his
name, outside Damietta. He was killed in the night of the Friday 15th day of Sha'aban, and it is for this that
each year there was that night a solemnity where gathered the people of the surroundings of Sheta who came to
pass the night there. They do still the same today. Damietta did not cease to belong to the Muslims until the
time when the Greeks disembarked there, in the year 90 of the hijra [20 November 708 to 8 November 709], and
seized Khaled ben Kisan, governor of the maritime region of Damietta. The Greeks sent their prisoner to the
emperor who, in regard to the truce intervened between him and the emir of the believers, restored him to the
latter, the caliph El Oualid ben 'Abd el Melek. Later, under the caliphate of Hesham ben 'Abd el Melek, the
Greeks made a descent at Damietta with three hundred sixty ships, killed and led away into captivity a great
number of inhabitants. It was in the year 121 [18 December 738 to 6 December 739]. At the epoch of the
struggle engaged between the two brothers Mohammed El Amin and Abd allah El Mamoun, discord reigned in the
country of Egypt and the Greeks, wishing to seize the country, disembarked

[PDF p. 667]

at Damietta in 200 and some [between the years 815 and 820]. Later, under the caliphate of the emir of the
believers El Moutawakel ala allah, 'Anbassah ben Ishaq being emir of Egypt, the Greeks disembarked at
Damietta on the day of Arafah of the year 238 [22 May 853]; they seized the town and what was there, killed a
great number of Muslims, and led away into captivity the women, the children, and the protected subjects.
'Anbassah ben Ishaq sent against them, on the day of the Nahr [23 May 853], an army to which had joined
themselves a great number of people; but they could not meet them, and the Greeks went to Tennis and
established themselves at the mouth of the river. 'Anbassah did not pursue them. Thus Yahia ben El Fadil said
to El Moutawakel:

[verses:] Can you admit that your women be taken by force, and that the Muslims be exposed to pillage and to
slaughter? An ass came to Damietta and the Greeks bounded to Tennis within reach of his eyes and nearer
still. They stayed at the mouth of the river, watching to, as formerly, strike Damietta, and preparing the
war. But the ass did not budge a span, thanks to his weakness and to his ignorance of what he should or
should not do. Do not forget that we are in danger of being lost in Egypt, and that the religion has nearly
disappeared.

El Moutawakel gave the order to build the citadel of Damietta and this construction was begun the Monday 3rd
of Ramadan of the year 239 [5 February 854]; at the same epoch, he proceeded to the organization of the
Egyptian fleet. In the year [probably 247, 17 March 861 to 6 March 862], the Greeks attacked Damietta with
about two hundred ships and stayed on the littoral for a month, pillaging, killing, making prisoners, and
delivering some combats to the Muslims. During the troubles that occurred following the death of Kafour El
Ikhshidi, the Greeks attacked Damietta again, the 10th of Rageb of the year 357 [10 June 968], with twenty
and some ships; they killed or made prisoners 150 Muslims.

In the year 408 [30 May 1017 to 19 May 1018], one seized at Damietta an enormous fish measuring

[PDF p. 668]

two hundred sixty cubits in length and a hundred cubits in width. The asses of the salt-works entered all
loaded into the belly of this monster and came out of it. In the skull of the beast kept themselves five men
with shovels to gather the grease that they passed to the crowd. And for a long time the people of the region
fed themselves on its flesh. In the time of the caliph El Faïz bi Nasr allah 'Eïsa, under the vizirate of El
Saleh Talaï' ben Razik, in Gamadi II of the year 550 [2 to 30 August 1155], presented themselves before
Damietta about sixty ships sent by Louis son of Roger, sovereign of Sicily. These enemies gave themselves to
pillage and to murder and made descents at Tennis, Rosetta, and Alexandria which they devastated. Then El
'Aded li din allah having become caliph and the vizirate having been confided for the second time to Shaour
ben Mogir El Sa'idi, the king of the Franks Mori (Amaury) came to besiege Cairo; after having struck the
inhabitants with a tribute, he burned Fostat. During this time, the commander of the Frankish fleet,
attacking Tennis, Ashtoum, and Minieh Ghamr with twenty cargo-ships, gave himself to murder, pillage, and
devastation. Under the vizirate of El Melek El Naser Salah el din Youssef ben Aroub (Saladin), who governed
for the account of El 'Aded, the Franks, mounted on more than twelve hundred ships, arrived at Damietta in
the month of Rabi I of the year 565 [23 November to 22 December 1169]; the Egyptian troops, for whose
equipment one had spent more than a hundred fifty thousand dinars, set out from Cairo; the war, a terrible
war, lasted fifty-five days. And, in so great a calamity, many Egyptians, and of the most noble, had
consented to aid the Franks and to maintain a correspondence with them. El Melek el Naser had them arrested
and put to death. Here is what was the cause of this calamity: The Ghozz, having passed from Syria into Egypt
with Asad el din Shirkawah (Shirkuh), the Franks, who feared that this tribe might seize the country, set out
to make an incursion into Egypt and asked for rescue from their brothers of Sicily. These sent them money and
arms in considerable quantities. The Franks, well provided with munitions and with machines, disembarked at
Damietta in Safar, brought by the number of boats we have said, and surrounded the town by land and by sea.
The sultan sent to Damietta an army under the orders of his nephew Teqi el din 'Omar and of the emir Shehab el
din El Hazemi; both had in abundance money, victuals, and arms. The

[PDF p. 669]

[OF THE TOWN OF DAMIETTE, continued]

situation of Damietta became very precarious, the inhabitants being always on the alert to ward off the
attacks of the Franks. Salah el din sent to ask for rescue from Nour el din Mahmoud ben Zenki, sovereign of
Syria, setting forth to him that he could not leave Cairo to go to Damietta, because he feared an uprising of
the Egyptians. Nour el din, not content with sending to Salah el din reinforcements upon reinforcements, came
out himself from Damascus and marched against the country that the Franks occupied on the littoral, invaded
it, and devastated it. The Franks, who still surrounded Damietta, informed of the attack of Nour el din and
fearing that this prince might make himself master of their territory, left Damietta the 25th of Rabi' I [18
December 1169], after having lost three hundred of their ships which had sunk; a great number of their men had
succumbed to an infectious malady that had broken out in their ranks. They burned moreover all that was too
heavy to transport, the machines and the other heavy objects. "Never," said Salah el din, "have I seen a man
more generous than El 'Aded. During the siege of Damietta by the Franks, he sent me a million dinars, without
counting the garments and the rest." In 577 [17 May 1181 to 6 May 1182], garrisons were established in the two
castles and ships were attached to the chains, so that from these ships one could combat and prevent the
passage between the two castles; the destroyed parts of the rampart were repaired, the breaches were blinded;
one fixed solidly the chain that connected the two castles. These works necessitated an expense of six
million dinars. The rampart was completed and its perimeter measured four thousand six hundred cubits.

In 588 [18 January 1192 to 6 January 1193], one cut, by order of the sultan, the trees of the gardens of
Damietta, one dug the ditches of the town, and one made a dike that ran along the chain of the castle.

In 615 [30 March 1218 to 18 March 1219], took place the great battle of Damietta which had for cause the
following facts: During the year 614 [10 April 1217 to 29 March 1218], the Franks had received rescue from the
great town of Rome, residence of the pope, and from other points of the countries of the Franks, and all had
gone to Acre where took place a great reunion. El 'Adel Abou Bekr ben Ayoub, informed of what was happening,
set out from Masr with his army and went to Ramleh. The Franks came out of Acre with an army

[PDF p. 670]

considerable and set about pursuing El 'Adel who was on the road for Beïsan. El 'Adel, frightened by the
number of his enemies to whom he could oppose only an insignificant army, turned back and went to Damascus.
The inhabitants of Beïsan and the surroundings, reassured by the presence of the sultan, had not left their
dwellings; but, the sultan hardly departed, the Franks arrived, passed the inhabitants by the edge of the
sword, devastated the country, seized the innumerable riches of the Muslims, and occupied Beïsan, Baïnas, and
all the towns of the region where they stayed three days, after which they returned to the countryside of
Acre with the booty and the captives. A great number of Muslims perished in this affair. The Franks stayed a
certain number of days in the countryside of Acre and, returning a second time, devastated Saïda and El
Shaqif and returned under the walls of Acre where they stayed. All this had happened from the 15th of Ramadan
to the feast of the rupture of the fast [16 December 1217 to 1 January 1218]. The sultan El 'Adel however had
installed himself at Morg el Safar and had sent an army under the orders of his son El Mo'azem 'Eisa to
Naplouse to resist the attacks of the Franks and prevent them from arriving at Jerusalem. The Franks, having
made at Tour a descent that lasted seven days, had returned to Acre and prepared themselves to invade Egypt.
In consequence, all embarked on the sea and set sail for Damietta in Safar. They disembarked there the
Tuesday 4th of Rabi I of the year 615 [31 May 1218] corresponding to the 8th of the month of Haziran. Their
army was composed of about 70,000 cavaliers and 400,000 foot-soldiers. They raised their tent facing Damietta
on the western bank and dug a ditch around the camp; behind, they raised a wall and set about attacking the
castle of Damietta, a solid castle from which set out the chains that barred the Nile and prevented the ships
coming from the sea from going up the river to Damietta. The Nile, indeed, after having watered Fostat,
continues its course toward the North and, arrived at Shatnouf, divides into two arms of which one directs
itself toward the North in the direction of Rosetta, where it throws itself into the sea; the other branch
goes from Shatnouf to Gouger, where it divides into two ramifications; one runs toward Ashmoum and throws
itself into the lake of Tennis; the other continues its course from Gouger to Damietta where is its mouth.
This

[PDF p. 671]

ramification of the river separates the town of Damietta from the western territory to which one has given
the name of island of Damietta, an island, indeed, that is surrounded by the water of the Nile and the sea.
The Franks, installed on the western territory, fabricated tools and cords, and built towers that they placed
on the ships, and these ships were directed toward the castle of the chain of which they wished to make
themselves masters, knowing well that once masters of the castle, they could easily go up the Nile to Cairo
and to Masr. The castle was filled with soldiers, but the Franks imagined a new ruse and, having raised, by
means of long beams, a tower on a great barque, directed it toward the castle, hooked themselves there, came
to blows with the garrison, and finally seized it. The news of the disembarkation of the Franks before
Damietta having reached El Melek El Kamel who then replaced his father in the government of Egypt, this prince
set out with the troops at his disposal, three days after the news had been brought to him by carrier pigeon
-- that is, five days after the beginning of the siege. He gave order to the vali of the Gharbieh to gather
the nomads and set out with a numerous army; the fleet also set itself in movement and stopped below
Damietta. The sultan stopped with his troops at the palace of El 'Adel, near Damietta. The army developed
itself as far as Damietta, to attempt to remove the Franks from the rampart. The struggle prolonged itself
and the castle resisted for four months when El 'Adel sent little by little from Syria his army which came to
rejoin entirely El Melek El Kamel. El 'Adel was very preoccupied with the descent of the Franks at Damietta
and, his disquiet increasing, he set out from Morg el Safar for 'Alefin where he fell ill and died the 7th of
Gamadi II [31 August 1218]. El Melek El Mo'azem 'Eïsa kept this death secret and had the body placed in a
litter escorted on the right and on the left by a servant and a physician. The Sharabdar (the one in charge
of drinks) prepared the potions and remitted them to the servant who drank them. And everyone was persuaded
that the sultan had drunk them. This lasted until the cortège had entered into the citadel of Damascus, where
had been transported the treasures and the coffers of money. There, the news of the death of the sultan was
rendered public, and his son El Melek El Mo'azem, after having entered into possession of all that was under
his hand, buried his father in the citadel; from there he transported him to the School Adeliah, at Damascus
itself. On learning the death of his father, El Melek el

[PDF p. 672]

Kamel, then at the palace of El 'Adel near Damietta, seized the power in Egypt. The Franks, redoubling their
ardor in the struggle, made themselves masters of the castle of the chain, broke the one that was attached to
it, in order to open the passage of the Nile to their ships and to seize the country. But El Kamel, to replace
the chain, had constructed a great dike barring the passage to the Franks; these delivered a fierce combat in
this place and succeeded in making a breach there. The castle and the dike had cost more than 70,000 dinars
and many times a day El Kamel set out on horseback from the palace of El 'Adel to Damietta to watch the work
and to seek by what indirect means he could attack the Franks. He had had sunk in the river a great number of
boats to close to the Franks the passage of the Nile, but these reopened a canal that had formerly served as
bed for the Nile and that bears the name of Azraq; they dug it to a great depth and having thus brought the
water of the Nile to the sea, they made, by this way, their ships go up to Bourah, following the bank of the
island of Damietta, and stopped facing the palace where the sultan resided, in order to repel him from there.
Arrived at Bourah, they watched the palace, attacked it, and attempted on several occasions to invade it, but
their efforts were long useless. This diversion changed nothing in the fate of the inhabitants of Damietta;
the victuals and the reinforcements continued to arrive to them. The Nile still separated them from the army
of the Franks and the gates of the town remained open, and they had in nothing to suffer from the siege. Each
night, the nomads pushed a thrust and carried off some Frankish soldiers; the enemy, disquieted by these
unforeseen attacks, dared not give itself to sleep. Soon the audacity of the nomads became such that they
sought to disquiet the Franks during the day and carried off complete tents with the people who were there;
the Franks put in ambush a large troop that killed a great number of men of the nomads. The winter came and
the swollen river submerged the encampment of the Egyptians and drowned some Muslims. The misfortune became
still greater and the situation worsened, the Franks not ceasing to harass them; little was needed for these
to be altogether victorious, when God raised a wind that broke the anchors of the boat of the Franks, a
marvel, which was carried toward the side of the Muslims and fell into their power. This boat, covered with
plates of iron so that one could not burn it, measured five hundred cubits in length. The Muslims broke it to
pieces and found there nails weighing each twenty-five rotolis. El Kamel

[PDF p. 673]

dispatched on all sides seventy messengers to incite the Muslims to send rescue to their brothers and to make
them understand the danger that would result from the occupation of Egypt by the Franks. Reinforcements were
at once sent from Hamah and from Alep and arrived to El Kamel in Shawal [21 December 1218 to 18 January 1219].
While everyone was attentive to these events, the emir 'Emad el din Ahmed, son of the emir Seïf el din Abou-l
Hassan 'Aly ben Ahmed El Hakari, surnamed Ibn el Mashtoub, at the news of the death of El Melek El 'Adel,
entered into struggle against El Kamel. He had at his discretion and under his orders the most disparate
bands, and bore the title of grand emir, supreme chief of the Hakari Kurds. He enjoyed a great prestige with
the kings and counted himself as one of them. He had moreover vast projects; he was liberal, generous, and
brave, and seemed destined to occupy a throne. He had had resounding adventures when he had filled the
functions of emir under the reign of Salah el din Youssef. He had decided, in an assembly of the army and of
the Kurds, to depose El Kamel and to proclaim in his place his brother El Melek El Faïz Ibrahim, the true
power to remain in the hands of Emad el din. The emirs 'Izz el din El Hamidi, Asad el din El Hakari, and
Mogahed el din, as well as the other emirs, marched in agreement with him. Instructed of this design, El
Kamel presented himself in their assembly while before them was placed the sheet where they were to inscribe
their oath of fidelity to El Faïz. On seeing him, they dispersed, while El Kamel, disquieted for his own
safety, withdrew and shut himself in his palace. It is then that arrived the Saheb Safi el din ben Shoukr,
coming from Amid to rejoin El Kamel who had summoned him after the death of his father. El Kamel went to meet
him, treated him magnificently, set forth to him the situation, and put at his disposition a large sum of
money. The night come, El Kamel mounted on horseback and, leaving the palace of El 'Adel, went alone to
Ashmoum Tenah, where he descended. The next morning, the army no longer had a sultan; each man mounted on
horseback very disquieted, no one preoccupying himself with his father, all throwing their impedimenta, tents,
victuals, arms, and went to the sultan. In the morning, the Franks ran toward Damietta and descended on the
eastern bank the Tuesday 16th of Dhu'l Qa'dah [3 February 1219]; without finding opposition or resistance,
they seized all that the camp of the Muslims contained -- that is,

[PDF p. 674]

[OF THE TOWN OF DAMIETTE, continued]

an indescribable booty. The sultan was plunged into great reflections and little was needed for him to abandon
the country, for he no longer had confidence in anyone of his entourage. The Franks redoubled their audacity
and wished to seize all of Egypt, and they thought indeed to make themselves masters of it. But God came to
the aid of the Muslims and reaffirmed the courage of the sultan. The brother of El Kamel, El Melek El
Mo'azem, came to rejoin him at Ashmoun Tenah and rendered him resolution and energy. Informed of the
intrigues of Ibn El Mashtoub, El Mo'azem engaged himself to put an end to these plots. Indeed, having gone on
horseback to the tent of Ibn el Mashtoub, he invited him to mount on horseback and to come with him. Ibn el
Mashtoub asked only to put on his underclothes and his riding garments, but El Mo'azem did not permit it him
and pressed him. He mounted therefore on horseback and set out with him. Arrived outside the camp of El
Kamel, El Mo'azem said to Ibn el Mashtoub: "O 'Emad el din, this country belongs to you, but I desire that you
cede it to us." And having remitted him a provision for the road, he confided him to a troop of his faithful
to whom he prescribed to lead him through the desert and to leave him free only when he would have left
Syria. Ibn el Mashtoub had to resign himself to obey El Mo'azem, for he was alone and could oppose no
resistance. His escort conducted him to Hamah, whence he set out for the Orient. El Mo'azem, having thus rid
himself of Ibn el Mashtoub, returned to El Kamel and gave the order to his brother El Faïz Ibrahim to go to
the kings of Syria with a letter of El Kamel asking them to declare war on the Franks. El Faïz set out
therefore for Damascus and from there for Hamah where he died poisoned, it is said. Thus El Kamel was
affirmed in his royal power and his spirit was appeased. The Franks however had invested Damietta by land and
by sea and pressed the siege which became very painful for the inhabitants; no reinforcement could arrive to
them. The enemy, who camped around Damietta, had surrounded its camp with a ditch behind which rose a wall.
The inhabitants delivered to the Franks terrible combats and held them at a distance, but they began to suffer
from the dearth, for the victuals were rare. It is then that El Mo'azem left El Kamel to go to Syria, while El
Kamel remained at Damietta to continue the war with the Franks. An officer of the stirrup, named Shemaïl,
asked the authorization to penetrate into Damietta: having thrown himself swimming into the river, he
penetrated into the town and promised the inhabitants the arrival of reinforcements. This trait made him taken
into esteem by El Kamel who went so far as to

[PDF p. 675]

make him vali of Cairo. It is to him that goes back the Khazanah of Shemaïl at Cairo. The situation remained
the same until the beginning of the year 16 [error -- 617, 9 March 1219 to... ; the footnote gives 617]. At
this moment, El Melek El Mansour Mohammed ben 'Amr ben Shahenshah ben Ayoub, sovereign of Hamah, sent his son
El Mozzafar Teqi el din Mahmoud into Egypt with an imposing army that was to aid his uncle El Kamel in his
struggle against the Franks. At his arrival at the camp, he was received by El Kamel who went to meet him and
had him descend at the right wing of the army, a place that his father and his grandfather had occupied in the
time of the sultan Salah el din Youssef. The Franks pushed impetuously the siege, and Damietta was defended by
a garrison of about 20,000 men; but they were decimated by the sickness and the dearth, the victuals were so
rare that an egg sold there for several dinars.

El Hafez 'Abd el 'Azim El Mounzari says he heard the cheikh Abou-l Hassan Aly ben Fadl recount that a rich
man who possessed a cow had killed it and sold it during the siege and had drawn from it eight hundred dinars.
In the book entitled El Mo'agem El Moutargem, the same author reports, according to the account of the emir
Abou Bekr Hassan ben Khasouyam who was at Damietta during the siege, that the sugar sold there for a hundred
forty dinars the rotoli and a chicken thirty dinars. "I bought," said Abou Bekr, "three chickens for
eighty-six dinars and a skin of water forty drachmas. To dig a grave, one asked forty metsqals. Once, my
sister, having split the belly of a camel, had filled it with chickens, fruits, vegetables, and other
objects, and, after having sewn it up, had thrown the beast into the river. At the same time she wrote me: 'I
have done this and that, watch the dead camel and take it.' The cadaver of the animal arrived to us during the
night. We gathered it, and found in the interior an enormous quantity of victuals that I distributed to the
inhabitants. My sister recommenced the experiment three times. At the end, the Franks had suspicions and
seized the dead beasts. The houses and the streets of the town were filled with cadavers; the victuals were
exhausting and the sugar became as rare as the precious stones. Of meat, there was no more; and we had no
means of finding any. Finally one came to the point that there remained in the town only a small quantity of
wheat and of barley." The Franks having scaled the rampart,

[PDF p. 676]

seized the town the Tuesday 24th of Sha'ban [4 November 1220]. The siege had lasted sixteen months and
twenty-two days. At the taking of the town, the Franks passed the women by the edge of the sword, committing
the greatest excesses, massacring and reducing to slavery the inhabitants. There was a considerable number of
victims. The sultan, informed of the event, mounted on horseback two days after the taking of Damietta and
stopped facing Talkha at the point formed by the two branches of the Nile, of which one directs itself toward
Ashmoum and the other toward Damietta. He established his camp at the place that was called later Mansourah
(the Victorious). The Franks fortified the ramparts of Damietta, transformed the mosque into a church, and
sent into the villages of the region detachments that gave themselves to massacre and pillage. The sultan
sent in all directions letters asking that one come to expel the Franks from the kingdom of Egypt; while
waiting, the army was occupied in building houses, hostelries, baths, and markets at Mansourah. For their
part, the Franks, having sent by sea their Muslim prisoners to Acre, came out of Damietta and came to
establish themselves in view of the sultan, facing Mansourah from which they were separated by the two arms of
the Nile, that of Ashmoum and that of Damietta. The enemy army counted two hundred thousand foot-soldiers and
ten thousand cavaliers. The Muslims made advance their ships of war, to the number of a hundred, facing
Mansourah; recruits had gathered, coming from Cairo, from Masr, and from all the region comprised between
Cairo and Assouan; the emir Hassam el din Younas and the fiqih Taqi el din Abou-l Taher Mohammed ben El Hassan
ben 'Abd el Rahman El Mohali made these troops come out of Cairo and Masr, and came to rejoin the bulk of the
army. The emir 'Ala el din Geldak and Gemal el din Ibn Seïram went to make levies in the region that extends
from Cairo to the extremity of the eastern Hauf and gathered an innumerable troop. The sultan established a
thousand cavaliers and several thousand nomads near Sharmesah to occupy the road between the Franks and
Damietta, and the ships, accompanied by an enormous fire-ship, went, under the orders of the emir Badr el din
ben Hassoun, to the point of the canal of Mehallah. Thus one intercepted the provisions that the Franks could
receive either by land or by the river. During this time, a Muslim army, come from the Orient, advanced from
Syria toward Egypt, while the Franks of the maritime countries, in incalculable number,

[PDF p. 677]

came to the rescue of the Franks of Damietta and sought to penetrate into Egypt. Having all gathered at
Damietta, they came out of the town, in serried and numerous ranks, and stopped facing El Kamel, as we have
said above. The reinforcements brought by El Melek El Ashraf Mousa ben El 'Adel, on the insistence of El Melek
El Mo'azem 'Eïsa, arrived to El Kamel, who went to meet them and had them establish themselves near him at
Mansourah, the 23rd of Gamadi II of the year 18 [9 August 1221]. The rescue sent by the various kings
followed, and finally the strength of the Muslim cavalry reached nearly forty thousand men. This army engaged
the combat against the Franks, removed from them six ships by gré or by force, and made them 2,200 prisoners.
A little later, the Muslims removed three other ships from the Franks, who, beaten down by these successive
reverses and feeling the situation critical, sent to ask for peace. But at the same time as their messenger
presented himself, the Alexandrians arrived with 8,000 combatants. The Franks asked, to withdraw from Egypt,
the cession of Jerusalem, of Ascalon, of Tiberias, of Giblah, of Laodicea, and of all the maritime region
conquered by the sultan Salah el din Youssef. The Muslims accorded all they asked, making exception for the
towns of Karak and of Shoubak, but the Franks refused the peace on these conditions, saying that they were to
receive Karak and Shoubak and moreover a sum of 300,000 dinars, in compensation for the part of the ramparts
of Jerusalem that El Melek El Mo'azem 'Eïsa, prince of Damascus, had destroyed. The latter, at the death of
his father El 'Adel, while the Franks occupied Damietta and had established themselves facing Mansourah where
El Kamel resided, feared that a part of the enemies might go by sea to seize Jerusalem and fortify themselves
there; it is for this that he had its ramparts demolished. These ramparts and their towers, very high and very
solid, were completely destroyed, with the exception of the tower of David. A great number of persons left
Jerusalem, where there remained only a small number of inhabitants. El Mo'azem removed from the town all it
contained of arms and instruments of war. The Muslims, having repelled the pretensions of the Franks,
recommenced the war, and a Muslim detachment having crossed the canal of Mehallah, disembarked on the land
that the Franks occupied, and dug an enormous trench in the Nile,

[PDF p. 678]

then at the maximum of its flood; the waters submerged the soil and separated from Damietta the Franks who
found themselves surrounded by the waters and had no longer to reach the town than an extremely narrow road.
At the same time the sultan had a bridge thrown at Ashmoum Tenah, and the army, crossing the river, occupied
the only road that remained to the Franks to fall back on Damietta, in the case where they would have wished
to beat in retreat. The enemy was filled with disquiet, for the land narrowed more and more around it.
Meanwhile, there arrived by sea to the Franks a great ship, escorted by numerous protecting fire-ships, and
filled with arms and provisions. This flotilla was attacked by the Muslim ships which, with the aid of God,
seized it. The Franks, at this news, felt themselves lost; the Muslims overwhelmed them with arrows and threw
themselves on the extremities of their wings. The Franks then overturned their tents, destroyed their
war-machines, and set fire to them, decided to march against the Muslims and to deliver them battle, in order
to be able to withdraw in safety on Damietta. But between them and the town were great heaps of mud and water,
for the Nile had submerged the lands. Thus, fearing in the state of weakness in which they were not to be
able to hold themselves standing, they humbled themselves and asked the aman, offering to abandon Damietta to
the Muslims. The sultan held council, but the opinions were divided; some refused to accord the aman to the
Franks, estimating that one should seize it by force; others consented to accord it to them, for fear of the
other Franks who were still in the islands and elsewhere. This last opinion prevailed. One decided to treat of
peace; the two parties were to take hostages. This happened the 9th of Rageb of the year 18 [29 August 1221].
The Franks sent as hostages to El Kamel twenty of their princes; El Kamel, on his side, sent his own son El
Melek El Saleh Negm el din Ayoub and a certain number of emirs. El Kamel received the princes of the Franks
in pompous ceremony, surrounded by his brothers and the officers of his house. This ceremony was full of
grandeur and of majesty. The priests and the Frankish monks having gone to Damietta, remitted the town to the
Muslims the 19th [8 September 1221]; that day was a great day. The town had just been remitted into the hands
of the Muslims when rescue arrived by sea to the Franks, and it was one of the benefits of God to have brought
them to Damietta only when

[PDF p. 679]

[OF THE TOWN OF DAMIETTE, continued]

the Muslims were already masters of the town. For if this rescue had arrived earlier, the Franks would have
been greatly reinforced by it; indeed, the Muslims had found the town of Damietta admirably fortified by the
Franks and almost impregnable. All being executed, the Franks sent back to the sultan his son and his emirs,
and El Kamel sent back to the Franks the princes he had with him as hostages. A truce of eight years was
signed. Among the conventions accepted for the conclusion of the peace between the Muslims and the Franks, it
had been stipulated that each would return to the other its prisoners. This article having been confirmed by
the sultan and his brothers on one part, and on the other by the Frankish princes, each returned with his
own. The sultan El Kamel reentered Damietta with his brothers and his army, and the day on which he made his
entry has remained a day one likes to recall. The Franks departed for their country, the sultan returned to
the capital of the kingdom and sent back the prisoners among whom were a certain number who were in captivity
since the time of Salah el din Youssef. The princes of Syria returned into their provinces with their troops,
and one spread on all sides the news of the taking of Damietta by the Muslims from the Franks. The Tatars had
already made themselves masters of the Empires of the Orient and the Franks were on the point of removing
Egypt from the Muslims. The duration of the sojourn of the Franks at Damietta until the moment when they had
to abandon it to return home was three years, four months, and nineteen days; during this period of time,
they were effectively masters of the town for one year, ten months, and twenty-four days. In 646 [26 April
1248 to 15 April 1249], the sultan El Saleh Negm el din Ayoub ben El Melek El Kamel Mohammed was struck with a
tumor in the knee that ripened and that one pierced. The operation, very painful, made the sultan ill. In
addition, an ulcer came to him on the chest, and he was obliged to keep the bed. But the ill that afflicted
him could not beat down his energy and, resolved to go from Egypt to Syria, he set out in a litter and
descended to the citadel of Damascus. There, presented himself a messenger of the emperor, king of the German
Franks of the island of Sicily, who, disguised as a merchant, came to teach him secretly

[PDF p. 680]

that Louis, named King of France, had formed the project of marching against Egypt and seizing it. The
sultan, ill, left Damascus in a litter and arrived at Ashmoum Tenah in Moharrem of the year 47 [16 April to
15 May 1249]. He accumulated in Damietta a considerable quantity of victuals, provisions, arms, and
instruments of combat, for he feared that there might arrive at Damietta what had arrived in the time of his
father, the epoch when the town had been taken for lack of provisions. At his arrival at Ashmoum Tenah, the
sultan wrote to Hasam el din Abou Aly El Hadiani, his lieutenant in Egypt, to have the fleet put in state in
the arsenals of the kingdom. Hasam hastened to obey and brought all his care to the execution of these
orders. He provided the ships with men and arms and all that was necessary, and had them depart one after the
other. The sultan, at the same time, dispatched the emir Fakhr el din Youssef ben Sheikh el Shioukh, and with
him the other emirs and the army. Fakhr el din arrived at Damietta, on the western bank, leaving thus the
river between his army and the town. At the second hour of the Friday 21 Safâr [16 May to 13 June 1249], the
fleet of the Frankish sailors arrived, mounted by considerable crews to whom had joined themselves the Franks
of the coast, and anchored facing the Muslims. The Frankish king sent to the sultan a letter thus conceived:
"... You are not ignorant that it is in me that the people of Jesus has put its confidence; I am not ignorant
either that you are the support of the Muslim people. You must know also that I have for neighbor the people
of the islands of Spain who bring me (in tribute) riches and presents; this people, we make it march before
us like a herd of oxen; we have killed the men, we have made the women widows, we have led away captive the
young girls and the young boys, we have made of their country a desert. But I have said enough of it and have
treated you quite as a sincere friend. If you engage yourself by the greatest oaths, if you send me the
priests and the monks, and if you come yourself to me, in sign of obedience to the cross, I will come to you
and will combat you on the terrain you prefer. If the country belongs to me, your riches will remain in my
hand; if the country is yours, if you carry it off, your powerful hand then will extend over me. I make you
know and warn you that the army I command covers the plain and the mountain; it is as numerous as the
pebbles. My soldiers come to you armed with the glaive of divine justice."

[PDF p. 681]

At the reading of this letter, the king, whose ill had aggravated, wept and asked that one answer. The cadi
Boha el din Zoheïr ben Mohammed wrote this answer: "In the name of God the clement and merciful, may his
prayers remain on our lord Mohammed, the apostle of God, on his family and all his companions. We have
received your letter where you menace us with the immense number of your army and the multitude of your
warriors. We, we are the masters of the swords, and none of us has died without our having avenged him on an
enemy. Every unjust man who has unjustly attacked us, we have annihilated him. If your eye, O presumptuous
one, had seen the grandeur of our swords, the space where we have delivered our battles, the citadels and the
shores we have conquered from yourselves, the devastation carried by us into your countries the most distant
and the nearest, you would bite your fingers with repentance; you would cease above all to pursue a day whose
beginning is to us, but whose end is to you. Then you will change opinion on yourself. 'Those who have
committed injustice will see the evil fall back on them' (Koran, XXVI, 128). When you have read this letter,
meditate the beginning of the Sourate El Nahal, where it is said: 'The order of God has come, do not seek to
accelerate it' (Koran, XVI, 1), and the end of the Sourate Sad where it is said: 'In some time you will learn
the news of it' (Koran, XXXVIII, 88). For the rest, we hold to the word of God who is the most veridical of
all those who speak: 'How many times an insignificant troop has vanquished a powerful army with the permission
of God, for God is with those who persevere' (Koran, II, 250). He who commits a transgression, say the sages,
opens a field of battle, and he against whom you have committed the transgression will overturn you and
precipitate you to your loss. Salutation!"

The Saturday [6 June 1249], the Franks disembarked and covered with their tents the greatest part of the
terrain that the Muslim army occupied; the tent of the king of France was red. The Muslims accosted them
boldly. In the encounter, the emir Negm el din, son of the Sheikh el Islam, and the emir Sarem el din Youssef
ben Sheikh el Shioukh were killed for the holy cause. In the evening, at the fall of night, the emir Fakhr el
din Youssef ben Sheikh el Shioukh, dragging the Muslim army, fled cravenly, withdrew with his troops onto the
territory of Damietta, and reached Ashmoum Tenah. The inhabitants of

[PDF p. 682]

Damietta, seized with panic, left the town during the night, without wishing to hear anything and leaving the
place absolutely deserted, rejoined the army at Ashmoum. They went barefoot, without garments, famished,
terrified, with their wives and their little children; they continued to flee as far as Cairo; the brigands,
on the way, stripped of their garments all those who possessed any, and left them naked. The public voice rose
against the emir Fakhr el din, whose flight had unleashed all the calamities on the Muslims. Damietta abounded
with combatants, victuals, arms, etc.; one had feared that it might undergo the same fate as in the time of El
Kamel, when it had succumbed only because of the exiguity of its provisions; yet, despite this inferiority, it
had resisted the Franks for more than a year and until its inhabitants had been annihilated. But God does what
he wills. The next morning, Sunday 23 Safar [7 June 1249], the Franks marched on Damietta, of which they found
the gates open and without defenders; believing in a ruse, the enemy waited to be quite certain of the
abandonment of the town, entered there without obstacle, without resistance, and seized easily all it
contained of victuals, arms, and munitions of war that were there in incalculable number, of riches and
precious objects. Islam and the Muslims received there a terrible blow; without the divine clemency, the name
of Islam would have disappeared from the earth. The inhabitants of Cairo and all the Egyptians were filled
with anguishes, because of the reverses of the Muslims and the sickness of the sultan who could hardly move.
The latter, very irritated against Fakhr el din, asked him: "Could you not, with your army, hold an hour
before the Franks?" And he made him undergo all sorts of bad treatments. But the circumstances counseled him
patience and pardon. However he flew into a rage against the Kénanis who were equally at Damietta, and he
addressed them reproaches. "What could we do," they answered, "since the army of the sultan, with all its
emirs, took flight after having destroyed the depots of arms? How would we not have fled, we too?" But the
sultan ordered that one hang them for having left Damietta without permission. And there were more than fifty
Kénani emirs hanged. Among them was the emir Ganim, who had a superb son and who asked to be executed before
his son; but the sultan ordered that the son be executed before the father, and

[PDF p. 683]

one hanged first the son and the father afterward. This execution, it is said, had been sanctioned by the
fiqihs. The rest of the emirs, seized with fear, thought of revolting against the sultan; but the emir Fakhr
el din explained to them that the health of the sultan was very precarious. "If he dies," he said to them,
"that suffices; if he does not die, he is anyway in your hands." The sultan undertook to fortify the ramparts
of Mansourah and went there in person the 25th of Safar [9 June 1249]; he covered the wall with shelters; the
barques were brought facing Mansourah with their crews complete and the soldiers were employed in the repair
of the constructions. A considerable number of Arabs, of people of the country, and of protected persons was
gathered; these bands set about harassing the Franks; but these covered the walls of Damietta with soldiers
and war-machines. The 1st of Rabi' I [14 June 1249], arrived at Cairo the Frankish prisoners carried off by
the nomads; among them were thirty-six cavaliers; the 5th of Rabi' II [18 July 1249], thirty-nine arrived; the
7th [26 July 1249], twelve; the 10th [29 July 1249], 25, of whom three cavaliers; the 18th of Gamadi I [29
August 1249], fifty. However the state of the sultan worsened and his forces diminished; the physicians
despaired of saving him. The 13th of Rageb [22 October 1249], arrived at Cairo a troop of prisoners
comprising forty-seven foot-soldiers and eleven knights; the Muslims who had managed to approach the place
that the Franks occupied on the river delivered them battle in the surroundings of Nesteraweh. In the night of
the Sunday, 14 Sha'ban [22 November 1249], the king El Saleh died at Mansourah. His death was kept hidden and
the body transported in a coffer to the citadel of Rodah; the emir Fakhr el din ben Sheikh el Shioukh took the
command of the army. The widow of the sultan, Shagarat el dorr, had, at the death of her husband, summoned the
emir Fakhr el din, the eunuch Gemal el din Mohassen who commanded the Bahrite and Hachite Mamelukes, and
instructed them of the death of the sultan which they kept secret, for fear of the Franks, for these tended
to seize the provinces of Egypt. The direction of affairs was confided to the emir Fakhr el din, and Fâres
Oktai was dispatched to El Melek El Mo'azem Touran Shah, then at

[PDF p. 684]

[OF THE TOWN OF DAMIETTE, continued]

Hosn-Kaifa, in Persia, to hasten his coming. Meanwhile Fakhr el din had the troops swear an oath of fidelity
to the sultan El Melek El Saleh, to his son El Melek El Mo'azem as his successor, and to the emir Fakhr el din
as atabek of the army and lieutenant of the king. This oath was sworn by all the people present at Mansourah
and at Cairo; in this last town, the ceremony took place at the palace of the vizirate, into the hands of the
emir Hasam el din ben Abou Aly, the Thursday 18 Sha'ban [26 November 1249]; the standards were brought out of
the royal residence of Mansourah and transported to Cairo with an autograph of the slave Souhaïl; all those
who saw this writing remained convinced that it had been traced by the very hand of the sultan. The emir Hasam
el din himself suspected nothing. The death of the sultan remained a secret for everyone until the Monday 22
Sha'ban [30 November 1249], the day when reached Cairo the order to say the second prayer in the name of El
Melek El Mo'azem, the first having been made in the name of the sultan (El Saleh); the name of El Mo'azem was
also to be inscribed on the coins. At the news of the death of the sultan, the Franks -- foot-soldiers,
cavaliers, and ships -- came out of Damietta, crossed the river, and stopped at Faraskour the Thursday 25
Sha'ban [5 December 1249]. The Friday [6 December 1249], a letter arrived at Cairo, of which the beginning was
thus conceived: "Dash forth, light and heavy, and apply yourselves, with all your resources and all your
souls, in the road of God. It will be a great good for you to know." There was in this letter an eloquent
exhortation to the holy war. One read it from the pulpit at the mosque of Cairo, where a considerable crowd
had gathered to hear it. The people of Cairo, of Masr, and the surroundings, very disquieted, set about
weeping, lamenting, and groaning, certain to see soon the Franks seize the country, because there was no
longer a king to direct the affairs. However, they did not let themselves be beaten down and hastened from
Cairo, from Masr, and from all the provinces. A considerable crowd was thus gathered. The Tuesday 1st of
Ramadan [8 December 1249], the Muslims and the Franks delivered a combat where perished El 'Alaï, emir of the
council and of the assembly. The Franks arrived as far as Sharmesah; the Monday 7th [15 December 1249], they
were at El Baramoun. Their approach

[PDF p. 685]

spread terror. The Sunday 13th [21 December 1249], they arrived facing Mansourah; there, they were no longer
separated from the Muslims except by the canal of Ashmoum. They dug to protect themselves a ditch that they
backed with a wall protected by numerous shelters, and they raised the machines to launch projectiles against
the Muslims. Their ships were anchored before them on the Nile, while the Muslim ships were in advance of
Mansourah. The struggle became terrible on the land and on the water. The 16th [24 December 1249], arrived to
the Muslims six cavaliers announcing that the Franks were in a critical position. On the day of the feast of
the rupture of the fast [7 January 1250], one made prisoner from the Franks a count, near relative of the
king. All the Muslim warriors put into combating the Franks an extraordinary ardor and made them terrible
wounds, killing them some man at each instant and making them prisoners. They threw themselves into the water,
passed to the bank occupied by the Franks, and sought by all sorts of stratagems to seize some Frankish
soldier. They defied death to such a point that one of them, having hollowed out a watermelon, enclosed his
head in it and, plunging into the river, directed himself toward the Franks: one of these, believing he
perceived a real watermelon, descended into the water to take it, but he was seized and led toward the Muslim
camp. The Wednesday 7 Shawal [13 January 1250], the Muslims removed from the Franks a ship that carried a
count and 100 men. The Thursday 15th of the same month [21 January 1250], the Franks threw themselves on
horseback toward the terrain occupied by the Muslims and engaged the combat, but in the affair they lost forty
cavaliers and sixty-seven foot-soldiers who were sent under good escort to Cairo; among them were three of the
principal secretaries of the king. The Thursday 21st [27 January 1250], the Franks launched on the river an
enormous flaming fire-ship, of which the Muslims made themselves masters. The canal of Ashmoum is fordable on
certain points; a false Muslim indicated the fords to the Franks; these, guided by the traitor, crossed these
fords on horseback in the night of the Tuesday 4th or 5th of Dhu'l Qa'dah [8 February 1250]. The Muslims were
informed of the arrival of the Franks

[PDF p. 686]

only when the enemy hurled itself with impetuosity on their army. The emir Fakhr el din was at the bath when
one came to announce to him the attack of the Franks; quite troubled, for he expected nothing of the kind and
was not on his guard, he sprang on horseback and went in all haste to give the emirs and the troops the order
to mount on horseback and to set out with a detachment of his Mamelukes. A Frankish patrol having met them
attacked them. Those who accompanied Fakhr el din took flight; the emir himself, struck with a blow of lance
in the side, was assailed on all sides with blows of sword and was killed on the spot. It is then that his
Mamelukes went in mass to his palace, broke the coffers and the cases, and seized his money and his precious
objects. The Franks, after the death of Fakhr el din, pushed toward Mansourah; the Muslims, terrified, fled
and dispersed to the right and to the left; the rout was such that little was needed for the Franks to efface
the name of Islam from the land of Egypt. The king of France arrived as far as the door of the palace of the
sultan, and he was going to make himself master of it when God permitted that a troop of Baharite and
Gemdarite Mamelukes, gathered formerly by El Melek El Saleh, and of which Beïbars el Bondoqdari was a part,
threw itself on the Franks and engaged so terrible a melee that it pushed them back from their positions and,
pursuing them without respite with blows of swords and pikes, put them to flight in their turn. The Franks
lost in this battle 150 cavaliers; their infantry had arrived at the dike and prepared to cross the canal. If
the affair had been conducted slackly and had left the Frankish infantry the time to come to blows with the
Muslims, there would have resulted for these last an irreparable misfortune. The collision took place in the
streets and the alleys of the town; if the space had not been so narrow, no Frank would have escaped. Those
who avoided death fled and raised, to protect themselves, a wall that they surrounded with a ditch. Some fell
back on the eastern bank, but the greatest number withdrew into the island contiguous to Damietta. At the
moment of the combat, a note had been confided to the wing of the birds and sent to Cairo where the
inhabitants pushed extraordinary cries; lieutenants and some soldiers arrived at Cairo, of which the gates
remained open during the night of Wednesday. The Wednesday [9 February 1250] the birds fell, bringing the
news of the defeat of the Franks and the figure of their dead. One bedecked the town and one made

[PDF p. 687]

resound at the citadel of the mountain the instruments of good news. El Mo'azem Touran Shah went to Damascus,
where he entered the Saturday, last day of Ramadan [6 February 1250], seizing all that was in the town. The
4th of Shawal [10 January 1250 -- error], arrived by carrier pigeon the news of his entry to Damascus and the
instruments of good news were struck by the troops at Mansourah and at the citadel of the Mountain. Touran
Shah set out from Damascus the antepenultimate day of Shawal [2 February 1250], and the news of his approach
succeeded one another. The emir Hassam el din ben Abou Aly went to meet him and met him at Salahieh the 16th
of Dhu'l Qa'dah [20 February 1250]. It is at this moment that one made known the death of El Melek el Saleh of
which, until then, absolutely no one spoke; the affairs had remained in the state, the palace had undergone no
change, and the dispositions had been taken as customary. Shagarat el dorr, favorite spouse of the sultan,
directed the affairs and, under the pretext that the sultan was ill, permitted no one to approach him. When
Touran Shah left Salahieh, the emirs and the Mamelukes went to meet him. The new sultan installed himself in
the royal palace of Mansourah the Tuesday 19th of Dhu'l Qa'dah [23 February 1250]. The following Monday [1
March 1250], the Muslims conducted barques that they transported on the backs of camels to the canal of
Mehallah where they set them afloat and loaded them with combatants. At the moment when the Frankish barques
crossed the canal of Mehallah, the Muslim barques that had ambushed themselves rushed on them and a combat was
engaged between the two flotillas. The Muslim fleet, arriving from Mansourah, cut the retreat to the Franks,
seized fifty-two of their barques, and killed or made prisoner a thousand men. The way of provisioning of the
Franks was thus cut. The dearth became among them very great, and they were besieged in their turn. The 1st of
Dhu'l Higgah [7 March 1250], the Franks seized seven fire-ships belonging to the flotilla operating in the
canal of Mehallah; the crew was able to escape. On the day of 'Arafah [16 March 1250], the Muslim ships
attacked the barques that brought

[PDF p. 688]

provisions to the Franks and seized thirty-two of these barques, of which nine were loaded with soldiers. The
force of the Franks went weakening, while the dearth augmented. In all haste, they asked a truce of the
Muslims, proposing to render them Damietta, on the condition that one would abandon to them Jerusalem and a
fraction of the countries bordering the sea. But these propositions were repelled. The 27th of Dhu'l Higgah
[2 April 1250], the Franks set fire to all their works of wood and embarked on their ships with the intention
of going to entrench themselves in Damietta. They set out for this town, in the night of the Wednesday 3rd of
Moharrem of the year 648 [5 April 1250]; their ships descended straight before them, with the current. The
Muslims, returned to the bank they occupied, embarked, they too, and threw themselves in pursuit of the
Franks; in the morning of the 4th [8 April 1250], the Muslims had surrounded the Franks, to whom they killed
a great number of men and made numerous prisoners: the number of cavaliers killed above Faraskour exceeded, it
is said, 10,000, and one made prisoners, as much of the cavalry as of the infantry, of the workers and of the
common people, nearly 100,000 men; the booty -- money, munitions, horses, and mules -- was incalculable. The
king of France and the principal lords of the Franks withdrew onto a hill and, asking the aman which was
accorded them, surrendered to the eunuch Gemal el din Mohassem El Salehi; one surrounded them at once and led
them to Mansourah. The king of France was chained and shut in the house that the cadi Fakhr el din Ibrahim
ben Loqman, writer of the bureau of redaction, occupied. One committed to the surveillance the eunuch Sabih El
Mo'azemi; the brother of the king was shut in with him. A daily allowance was served to the king. El Melek El
Mo'azem prescribed to Seif el din Youssef ben El Touri, one of those who had come with him from the Orient, to
occupy himself with the massacre of the prisoners. One made come out each night three hundred of them whom
one killed and whom one threw into the river. This lasted thus until there were no more of them.

Being master of the king of France, El Melek El Mo'azem set out from Mansourah and descended with the royal
court at Faraskour, where he had raised for himself a tower of wood. Delaying his march on Damietta, he wrote
with his hand to the emir Gemal el din ben Yaghmour, his lieutenant at Damascus, and to his son Touran Shah:

[PDF p. 689]

[OF THE TOWN OF DAMIETTE, continued]

"Glory to God who has removed from us the desolation; there is no victory except by the intervention of God.
Today, let the believers rejoice in the divine victory! As for the benefits of your master, you can cite them;
but if one wished to enumerate the benefits of God, that would be impossible. We send to the high council of
El Gemal and to all the Muslims the happy news that God has accorded the Muslims the victory over the enemies
of the religion. These had brought to completion their work, doing us the greatest harm, chasing from the
country the servants (of God), the inhabitants, and the children. It is then that one can cry that one should
not despair of the divine assistance. And on Monday, the 1st day of the blessed year 648, God accomplished his
benediction on Islam; we opened the treasures, we distributed the riches and the arms, we gathered the
nomads, the volunteers, and people whom no one knows, if not God. They came from all the most distant defiles,
from the most far-off countries. Seeing this, the enemies sent to ask peace on the conditions intervened
between them and El Melek El Kamel; but we refused. And in the night of Wednesday, they abandoned their tents,
their riches, their heavy objects, and withdrew toward Damietta. But we pursued them, and the saber did not
cease to strike on their backs during all the night, making fall on them the calamity and the misfortune. In
the morning of Wednesday, we killed them thirty thousand men, without counting those who, of themselves,
threw themselves into the river; as for counting their prisoners, one might as well count the sea. The
Frenchman took refuge in the port and asked the aman. We accorded it to him; we made him prisoner, we treated
him well, and we made ourselves master of Damietta with the aid of God, and thanks to his power, to his
sovereignty, and to his grandeur." And with his letter, he sent the chaperon (hood) of the French king. The
emir Gemal el din put it on his head; this chaperon was of red scarlet, garnished with squirrel-skin. The
Sheikh Negm el din ben Israël said on this subject:

[verses:] The cape of the Frenchman has arrived, and it is truly worthy of the lord of the emirs; it was
white as paper, but our swords have dyed it with blood.

Another said:

[verses:] O chief of all the kings of the time, you have made accomplish the divine promises of victory;

[PDF p. 690]

our master has not ceased to penetrate into the secret country of the enemy, and to clothe, with the robes of
the kings, his slaves.

El Melek El Mo'azem, having become menacing for his stepmother, Shagarat el Dorr, set about asking her for the
treasures of his father. Filled with fear, she wrote to the Mamelukes of El Melek El Saleh to excite them
against El Mo'azem. Now, when Fares Oqtaï had gone to rejoin El Mo'azem at Hosn Kaifa, he had believed that
this prince would accord him an emirate; but it had been nothing of the kind, and El Mo'azem had thus set
against him the Mamelukes of his father. Moreover, he had shown himself brutal vis-à-vis the queen, had
removed from the emir Hassam el din ben Abou Aly the lieutenancy of the kingdom, had obliged him to come
rejoin the army, without occupying himself more with him. He had kept apart the servants of his father and had
replaced them by people come with him from the Orient, whom he had provided with the royal charges. He made of
the eunuch Messour his intendant, and of Sabih, a vigorous Abyssinian slave, his treasurer. To this last, he
had given a cane of gold, considerable riches, and immense fiefs. When he was drunk, he gathered candles of
which he cut the top with his saber, saying: "Thus will I do to the Bahrites." He was foolish, frivolous,
blinded by his love of pleasures; everyone detached himself from him. The situation prolonged itself until the
Monday 29th of Moharrem [13 April]. That day, the sultan was seated on a mat, when one of the Bahrite
Mamelukes presented himself and, striking him with his sword, cut off the fingers of his hand. El Mo'azem
fled and reached the tower, and, pursued by the mutineers with naked sword, took refuge at the summit of the
tower of wood; the Mamelukes launched arrows at him and set fire to the tower; he jumped from the top of the
tower and ran toward the canal: "I want none of your kingdom," he cried; "let me return to El Hosn; O Muslims,
is there no one among you who wishes to rescue me and defend me?" But the soldiers were there standing, armed
with their swords, and no one answered him. The arrows set about raining on him from all sides: he was hacked
with blows of sword and died burned, drowned, massacred the Monday in question. His body was left on the bank
of the river for three days after which one buried it. After the death of El Mo'azem, the people of the
kingdom were of the opinion to name as queen of Egypt Shagarat el Dorr, mother of Khalil, and to give the
command of the army to

[PDF p. 691]

the emir 'Az el din Aybek El Tourkomani El Salehi; everyone swore an oath in this sense, and one dispatched to
the queen 'Az el din El Roumi who, having gone to her at the citadel of the mountain, informed her of what had
happened. The queen was very satisfied with it and affixed on the firmans her paraph which read: "Mother of
Khalil." The prayer was said in her name from the pulpit at Masr and at Cairo. Negotiations had been engaged
with the king of France for the cession of Damietta, and the emir Hassam el din ben Abou Aly El Hadiani had
been charged with the negotiations. The king of France, after many negotiations, consented to this cession, on
condition that one would set him free. He sent therefore to the Franks the order to remit Damietta to the
Muslims; but the cession was made only after long discussions and numerous detours, the Friday 3 Safar [7
May]. One planted the banner of the sultan on the ramparts, and one proclaimed there at last the word of Islam
and the testimony of the truth; the town had remained in the hands of the Franks for eleven months and seven
days. One gave back the liberty to the king of France, to his brother, to his wife, to all those who were
with him. One conducted them to the western bank where they embarked the next day, Saturday 4 Safar [8 May],
and set sail for Acre.

It is regarding these events that the vizier Gemal el din Yahia ben Matrouh said:

[verses:] Say to the Frenchman, if you meet him, this sincere word of a sincere counselor: "May God reward
you for what has happened, thanks to the servants of Jesus the Messiah. You came to Egypt, counting on seizing
it, and imagining, O drum, that it suffices to blow to play the flute. But your destiny pushed you toward the
calamity, and the world, despite its immensity, seemed to you narrow. All your companions are deposited,
thanks to your wise direction, in the bosom of the tombs: of your fifty thousand men one sees no more than
dead or wounded prisoners. May God push you to do the same again! Perhaps thus Jesus will rid himself of you.
If your pope is satisfied with it, it is that (sometimes) the worst counsels come from the best counselors.

[PDF p. 692]

Say to them that, if they wish to return to avenge themselves, still solid is the house of Ibn Loqman in the
same place; that the chains are still there and that the eunuch is still Sabih."

And God decreed that the Frenchman, after having escaped this disaster, gathered again a considerable army and
went to Tunis. Ahmed ben Ismaïl El Zayat, a young Tunisian, said:

[verses:] O Frenchman, this land is the sister of Egypt, prepare yourself for the misfortune that is going to
overwhelm you. Here the house of Ibn Loqman will be for you a tomb, and you will have for eunuch Mounqir and
Nakir (the two angels of death).

These verses were of good augury, for the Frenchman died during the siege of Tunis. The emirs, once masters of
Damietta, sent couriers to Cairo, one made resound the instruments of good news, and one bedecked Cairo and
Masr, and the army arrived, coming from Damietta, the Thursday 9 safar [13 May].

During the reigns of El Ashraf Mousa ben El Melek El Messa'oud Aqsis ben El Melek El Kamel and of El Melek El
Mo'ez 'Az el din El Tourkomani, the troubles accentuated themselves in Egypt, and El Melek El Naser Youssef
ben El 'Aziz made himself master of Damascus. The chiefs of the kingdom -- that is, the Bahrite Mamelukes --
fell in agreement to raze the town of Damietta, where they feared a second descent of the Franks. One sent
there therefore quarrymen and laborers, and the ramparts were attacked the Monday 18 sha'ban 648 [15 October
1250] and demolished completely; there remained nothing more of the town than the mosque. To the south of the
primitive emplacement one built on the shore of the Nile straw-huts where the inhabitants of little vigor
established themselves and to which they gave the name of El Menshieh. The destroyed rampart had been raised
by the emir of the believers El Moutawakel 'ala Allah as we have said above. When, after the murder of El
Melek El Mozaffer Qouttouz, El Melek El Zahir Beïbars El Bondoqdari El Salehi had appropriated to himself the
kingdom of Egypt, he dispatched from Masr, in 659 [6 December 1260 to 15 November 1261], a great number of
quarrymen charged with obstructing the mouth of the river at Damietta. These workers, having cut a great
number of round stones, threw them into the branch of the river that goes to pour itself

[PDF p. 693]

into the sea, to the north of Damietta: the bed of the river narrowed all the more and no longer permitted the
ships to arrive as far as the town. Until present, it is always thus, and the great barques, coming from the
sea, cannot penetrate there; the merchandise brought by the barques is transshipped into special boats on the
Nile that the people of Damietta name guermes (singular guerm). The sea-ships go to stop at the extremity of
the cape that separates the two mouths of the river. Today the inhabitants of Damietta claim that if the
sea-ships cannot go up the river, it is that they are prevented from it by an accident of terrain that
obstructs the mouth, or by an accumulation of sand that has formed in this place. But it is an erroneous
explanation that has for origin the great number of wrecks of shipwrecked vessels that one gathers in this
place, wrecks of which they are ignorant of the origin, not knowing the events that took place. Until present
still, the entry of the river is redoubtable to the ships, and those that are lost there are numerous.

I went to this place to visit it and I recognized that it was one of the most astonishing that men have seen.

As for the Damietta of today, it was formed after the destruction of the ancient town; at the actual
emplacement, huts had been raised, but the place constantly enlarged itself and became in its turn a great
town with markets, baths, mosques, schools, places of prayer. The houses give on the great arm of the Nile;
behind extend gardens that make of this country one of the most beautiful countries of God one can see. The
emir, the vizier El Mouchir El Ostadar Ylbagha El Salemi declared to me never having seen, in his voyage from
Samarcand to Masr, a country more beautiful than this Damietta. I believed his praise exaggerated, but I
visited it, I too, and I found that it was the most beautiful and most agreeable country.

And here is what I say of it:

[verses:] May the rains of spring water Damietta! Salutation to it from the one who has visited it! Its good
memory only increases my desire to see it again. May the south winds not cease to feed its clouds, for it is a
land whose beauty equals that of Paradise. Those who traverse the regions during the night know how sweet it
is, and the beauties that surround it cannot be counted.

[PDF p. 694]

[OF THE TOWN OF DAMIETTE, the praise-poem continued]

[verses:] Indeed, the watercourses that surround its gardens resemble glittering swords or the surface of
cheeks. Its thirsting dust makes it resemble the lover from whom the beloved turns away. Standing on its feet,
the eyes drowned in tears, it watches the stars of the night, plunged in grief. To see it thus standing one
would believe that, despite the length of the waiting, it still hopes in the person of its friend. And then,
these noriahs (water-wheels)! they renew the grief in the heart of the solitary lover. I recount to it my
grief, and it seems to me that it recounts to me its own and pushes the same plaint. It seems to me that it is
a sky whose stars turn always for its good and its happiness. In the white basins, how pretty is the
water-lily! Sweeter, more brilliant in color than the rose -- (one would say) a sky of crystal sown with
stars of marvelous colors and symmetrically arranged. On the bank of the sacred Nile reigns a promenade that
would render youth to the old man weakened by age. There are born winds that dissipate sorrow and sadness, and
nights sweet as the arrival of the beloved. At the meeting of the two rivers are a multitude of marvels that
burst forth and shine from near as from far. When the Nile throws itself into the sea, one would say two kings
marching, surrounded by their army, who present themselves for the combat; the struggle becomes fierce, and
one fights only with the long and flexible lances. They redo what they have already done, and will remain as
they are, magnificent betrothals and in infinite struggle. How many times have I tasted delicious pleasures on
their banks, sweet and thirst-quenching for the one who goes there to drink! How many times have I enjoyed in
these gardens the sweetness of living there in peace and in happiness! On the promontory so frequented how
many times have I wandered alone, and on the side of Shata, to the right of El 'Elm. There, the eye of the
spirit sees all it can embrace of beauty, of goodness, of riches, and of glory. O my God, may your goodness
accord me to return there again, without this time my being called there by misfortune or by pain!

[PDF p. 695]

At Damietta, in the destroyed town, is a mosque, one of the most revered sanctuaries of Islam. One calls it
generally Menged Fatah. It is the oratory founded by the Muslims at Damietta, at the time of the conquest of
the town, when God, for the first time, had Egypt conquered by the hand of 'Amr ben El 'As. On the door is a
Cufic inscription, recalling that it was rebuilt after the year 500 of the Hijra [2 September 1106 to 21
August 1107]. It contains a great number of marble columns, of which some have not their equals. This oratory
bears the name of Gama' Fatah, for the simple reason that a personage called Fâteh sojourned there, which made
the people give it the name of Gama' Fatah. This personage is none other than Fateh ben Othman El Asmar El
Takrouri, who had gone from Merâqesh (Marrakesh) to Damietta, with the aim of detaching himself from the
world. There, he gave water to drink in the markets, without exacting anything from anyone. He sojourned also
outside El Thogr, but being obliged to attend there the prayer in common, he abandoned the world completely
and established himself in the parts of Tounah, on the lake of Tennis, a village ruined for nearly seven
years, of which he repaired the mosque. From Tounah, he went to the mosque of Damietta and dwelt in a hole, at
the foot of the minaret, without seeing anyone, except at the hour of prayer. At that moment, he went to pray
and, after the salutation of the imam, returned to his hole. If one of his neighbors addressed the word to
him, he spoke to him standing, after the termination of the prayer. His life was only union (with God) in the
separation (that is, the world that separates from God), rapprochement in the distancing, communion in the
absence. During the pilgrimage he made, he always walked apart from his companions, and one saw him only at
the moments of the halt. He remained constantly apart from the others and spoke to no one until his return to
Damietta; there, he set about repairing the mosque and cleaned it himself; he thus chased all the bats nested
in the cupolas, he filled the cisterns with water, he paved the court, leveled the terrace with plaster, and
established himself there. Previously, since the destruction of the town, the mosque was open only on Friday.
And one installed there an imam charged with reading the five prayers; this imam dwelt in the house of the
sermon and occupied himself with the direction of those who came there. One named a reader who read the Koran
at dawn and at the setting of the sun; another was

[PDF p. 696]

charged with reading a sermon, to recall to men (the benefits of God) and to instruct them. He said: "If I
knew at Damietta a place more venerable than the mosque, I would go to establish myself there, and if I knew
on the earth a place where the poor man was more miserable than at Damietta, I would go there and stay there."
If some poor man came to find him and he had nothing to give him, he sold one of his garments to be able to
serve him the meal of hospitality. He lay down at night and awoke in the morning, without anyone knowing
anything of him; the eye saw nothing of it, the ear heard nothing of it. He helped in secret the poor and the
indigent. If someone asked him for something, he always received much more than he had asked, and if God made
him obtain something, he employed it in alms. He strove to humble himself, and God made burst forth his virtue
and his benediction without his being for anything in it, and I have known of him many marvelous traits. He
applied himself to follow the example of the ancients who held to the Book and the tradition, kept away from
all discussion, and repelled all pride and all boastfulness. He kept his conduct secret and was full of
restraint in his words and in his acts. No one kept him company during the night; one was ignorant of which
were his days of fasting and which days his fast was broken. Always he employed the expression "if it please
God," there where the others made use of the exclamation "by God!" The cheikh 'Abd El 'Aziz El Damiri having
counseled him to take a wife, affirming that marriage was prescribed by the Sunnah, he married two women
toward the end of his life, but he entered the home of neither of them during the day; never did he eat nor
drink with them. His night was consecrated to prayer; however sometimes he went to them, sometimes he
abstained from visiting them, following the distribution of his time and the exigencies of his religious
practices and of his love of solitude. None of his familiars ever knew which days he fasted and which days he
did not fast. One contented oneself with carrying him his food and depositing it in his particular chamber,
without one ever having seen him eat. He was fond of the poor and affected himself the state of poverty. He
repelled with all his forces oppression and tyranny, remaining humble with the poor and haughty with the
powerful and the rich; he took pleasure in the reading of the Koran and of books, but no one ever saw him
write. He read the Koran with humility and circumspection. He never made use of a carpet for prayer; never did
he affiliate himself with any sect, nor cover his head with the little white bonnet. He never said: "I am a
cheikh,"

[PDF p. 697]

nor: "I am a poor man." Each time the pronoun "I" presented itself in his discourses, he excused himself for
it and asked God pardon for having employed it. Never did he attend a (musical) audition, but he made no
reproaches to whoever attended one. His conduct was perfect, without his seeking to render it perfect. He
showed himself very haughty with the people of the world and very humble with the poor, presenting to these
the food and not presenting it to the rich. If there was at his home some reunion, he put the poor before the
rich, and if a poor man left his house, he accompanied him a few steps, barefoot, without shoe, and remained
standing watching him move away, until he had lost him from view. If some poor man enjoyed the title of
cheikh, he had him sit politely near him, keeping his turban, and preceded him on the road. He said: "I say to
no one: Do this or do not do it. He who wishes to conduct himself well has only to watch his actions. He whom
his own sight does not suffice to conduct will not conduct himself by listening to others." One of his
familiars having said to him: "My lord, pray God that he accord us his benefits, for we are poor," he answered
him: "If you wish God to be generous toward you, keep nothing in your house, and then implore his generosity.
For it is written: Ask nothing of God if you possess only a ring of iron." According to him, the poor man is
like a virgin, and as soon as he implores, he ceases to be one. One of his familiars asked him one day to pray
God to accord him a more ample life, for his was very precarious: "I will not pray God to accord you a more
ample life," he answered; "I will ask him for you a virtue and a perfection greater." Despite his religious
practices and all the time he employed in them, he did not neglect his friends and did not forget their
affairs, to the point that he charged himself with settling them and doing all the necessary for his friends,
and arranging them to the best of their interests. He knew the situation of people according to their
function; he exalted science and showed himself generous toward the orphans; he was full of compassion for
the sickly and the widows. He employed himself to intercede with the judge for affairs general and
particular, without their number rebuffing him or boring him. He multiplied in secret the alms without ever
asking anything for himself. He depreciated what he gave, although it was sometimes considerable; on the
contrary, he made great case of what one gave him, however small the present was, and rewarded the donor by a
gift much more important. Never did he frequent

[PDF p. 698]

an emir or a vizier; but his conduct and his manner of being raised him in humility, glorified him in poverty:
it was the rapprochement in the distancing, the union in the separation, the renunciation in the midst of the
world and of its creatures. He was greater still than his reputation. Here is one of the prayers he made for
himself and for those who asked it of him: "My God, remove us from the world and the people of the world, and
remove them from us." He remained thus until his death, occurred at the end of the night, of which the next
day was the 8th of Rabi II of the year 695 [14 February 1296]. He left two children who had not the means to
live for one night. He owed in addition 2,000 dirhems. One buried him in the vicinity of the Mosque, and,
still today, one visits his tomb.

[End of Chapter LXI.]

[PDF p. 699]

CHAPTER LXII
OF SHATA

Shata, a town situated in the vicinity of Tennis and of Damietta, gives its name to the Shatawiah stuffs. It
itself, it is said, takes its name from Shata ben El Hamouk, whose father was the uncle of El Maqoqos and
commanded at Damietta. When God had had the citadel conquered by the hands of 'Amr ben El 'As and the latter
had made himself master of the land of Egypt, he sent to seize Damietta an army that besieged the town and
seized its ramparts; Shata, with two thousand of his companions, came out of the town and went to join the
Muslims. Already before he loved virtue and had a penchant for Islamism of which he had heard speak. Masters
of Damietta, the Muslims had to struggle against the prince of Tennis. Shata went to Bourlos, to Damirah, and
to Ashmoum Tenah and called the inhabitants to arms. These joined themselves to him to combat the people of
Tennis. Shata set out therefore with these partisans to whom were united the Muslims of Damietta and the
reinforcements dispatched by 'Amr ben El 'As, to deliver battle to the people of Tennis. In the encounter of
the two armies, Shata combated with an admirable courage and killed twelve of the most famous warriors of
Tennis; he died a martyr in the night of Friday the 18th day of Shaaban of the year 21 of the Hijra [19 July
642]. One buried him outside Damietta, at the place where is still today his tomb. One raised him a monument
where the people assemble each year the 15th of the month of Shaaban; one went there in crowds from all the
villages around, and this usage is practiced still at present. It is at Shata that was fabricated the veil of
the Ka'bah. "I saw there," reports El Fakehy, "one of the veils of the emir of the believers Haroun El Rashid,
in qebati stuff of Egypt, bearing this inscription: 'In the name of God, may the benediction of God be on the
servant of God Haroun, emir of the believers. May God prolong his life! This is one of the objects fabricated
by order of El Fadl ben El Rabi', freedman of

[PDF p. 700]

the emir of the believers, in the workshop of tapestry of Shata. It is a veil for the Ka'bah. The year 190
[27 November 805 to 16 November 806].'"

Among other localities very well known of the district of Damietta is Barzakh. It is an oratory raised on the
lake of Damietta. Everyone calls it El Barzakh, but I do not know why. I was there witness of an extraordinary
fact: there is in this mosque a great minaret constructed in bricks; if someone pushes it, it trembles. And
finding myself one day at the summit, there where the muezzin makes the call, I set the minaret in movement,
and I saw its shadow displace itself following its double movement of coming and going. One meets around this
mosque debris of skeletons that seem to be the remains of those who fell as martyrs in the combats against the
Franks. God knows it, and you know nothing.

Dabiq is one of the villages that depended on Damietta. One fabricated there stuffs brocaded with gold,
turbans of dyed linen, and the dabiqi stuffs with designs of gold. It is there also that were made the turbans
of linen with threads of gold; each of these turbans measured a hundred cubits in length and contained
applied pieces woven of gold. The quantity of gold that a turban also contained was worth five hundred dinars,
not counting the price of the silk and the thread. These turbans were inaugurated, as well as other stuffs, in
the time of El Aziz billah ben El Moezz, in the year 365 [10 September 975 to 29 August 976], and employed
until the death of this prince, occurred in Shaba'n of the year 385 [19 August to 16 September 996].

El Nahririah, a village of the province of Gharbieh, was established as a religious donation by the emir Shams
el din Sonqor El Sa'di, lieutenant-general of the army in the time of El Naser Mohammed ben Qalaoun, who
achieved the construction of it. This construction reached in his time the sum of ten thousand dirhems of
silver; this emir left it, and the construction was continued for the sultan; the situation of this village
became more and more prosperous, to such a point that one counted there more than thirty gardens, and the
revenues, thanks to the great number of inhabitants, rose to a thousand dirhems of silver per feddan; then it
became a great town that brought in per year, kharadjî and hilàlï, a sum of 300,000 dirhems of silver, that is

[the footnote: The sense of these expressions will be explained in chapter 94 which treats of the "conversion
of the Coptic kharadjî year into the Arab hilàlï year."]

[PDF p. 701]

fifteen thousand dinars of gold. This Sonqor died in the year 728 [17 November 1327 to 4 November 1328]; it is
to him that is due the school of El Sa'adiah in the quarter of Hadrat el Baqar, outside the gate of Zaouileh.
The island of the Béni Naser takes its name from the children of Naser ben Ma'wiah ben Bekr ben Houazen. Here
is on what subject. The children of Hamas ben Zalem ben Ga'il ben 'Amr ben Darahman ben Nasir ben Ma'wiah ben
Bekr ben Houazen had in Egypt a considerable force and had grown to such a point that they had filled the
Delta and appropriated it to themselves. A tribe of Berbers entered into struggle with them. This tribe was
known under the name of Laouatah; it claimed to descend from Qeïs. It repelled the Béni Naser who dwelt within
walls and resided in a fixed fashion in a place situated in the middle of the Nile that took their name; and
this place is the island of the Béni Naser.

[PDF p. 702]

CHAPTER LXIII
OF THE ROUTE THAT LEADS FROM MASR TO DAMASCUS

The first who established the posts for the horses was the king Dara (Darius), son of Bahman, son of
Kibeshtasf, son of Kihrasf, one of the kings of Persia; in the time of Islam, the first who established the
posts was the emir of the believers El Mahdi Mohammed ben Abou Ga'far El Mansour, who installed between Mecca,
Medina, and the Yemen relays of mules and of camels in the year 166 [15 August 782 to 4 August 783]. The
origin of this term is the word barid zeneb. For Darius having distributed to the relays of the great roads
mounts whose tail had been cut, one called this relay barid zeneb (cut tail). In adopting this expression, the
Arabs cut off the half of it and said simply barid. The great route that the armies, the caravans, and other
travelers follow, setting out from Cairo and directing themselves across the sands toward the town of Gaza, is
not the route that, in antiquity, led from Egypt into Syria. The one that today crosses the desert began to be
employed only after the year 500 of the Hijra, at the moment when was extinguishing itself the dynasty of the
Fatimids. The route that was in use before the Franks had made themselves masters of the maritime country of
Syria was quite other. In his book of the Routes and the Kingdoms, Abou-l Qasem 'Obeïd allah ben 'Abd Allah
ben Khardadabah, in his chapter of the description of the earth, expresses himself thus: The route from
Damascus to El Kesouah is 12 miles; from El Kesouah to Gasem 24 miles; from there to Fiq, 24 miles; then to
Tiberias, town of the Jordan, 6 miles; from Tiberias to El Lagoûn 20 miles; then to El Qolonsouah 20 miles,
then to El Ramleh-Filastin 24 miles; the route from El Ramleh to Azdoud counts 12 miles; from Azdoud to Gaza,
20 miles; from there to El Arish, 24 miles across the sands; from there to El Ouaradah 18 miles; from there to
Omm El Arab 20 miles; from there to El Farma 24 miles, from there to Garir 30 miles; from there to El Qâserah
24 miles; from there to Mesged Qoda'ah 18 miles; from there to Balbeïs, 21 miles; from there to Fostat,
capital of Egypt, 24 miles. This route, as one sees, was quite different from the one

[PDF p. 703]

that one sees today to go from Masr to Damascus. One goes at present from Balbeïs to El Farma across the
regions that one calls actually the country of El Sabakh and that form part of the Hauf; from Farma, a town
neighboring Qatiah, one goes to Omm El Arab, a country today ruined, on the shore of the sea, in the space
comprised between Qatiah and El Ouaradah and where many people practice excavations and find dirhems of pure
silver, very heavy and of great module; from Omm El Arab, one goes to El Ouaradah, a town that occupied
formerly an emplacement different from the one it occupies today, and of which one has spoken in this book.
When the Franks left Constantinople in 490 [19 December 1096 to 8 December 1097] to remove from the Muslims
the country they occupied, Baudoin (Baldwin) seized El Shoubak, previously ruined, and repeopled it in 509 [27
May 1115 to 14 May 1116] and advanced as far as El Arish, a prosperous country at this epoch. The
communications were cut between Egypt and Syria, and one had to follow the land route with the Arabs, for fear
of the Franks. Finally, the sultan Salah el din Yousef ben Ayoub wrested Jerusalem from the Franks in 583 [13
March 1187 to 1 March 1188], redoubled his attacks against them, and removed from them a great number of
countries on the shore of the sea. This route crossed the desert; the travelers have followed it since then
until the reign of El Melek El Saleh Negm el din Ayoub ben El Kamel Mohammed ben El Adel Abou Bekr ben Ayoub,
who founded in 644 [19 May 1246 to 7 May 1247] in the land of El Sabakh, at the extremity of the desert, a
town known still at present under the name of El Salahieh; it is there that he descended and sojourned, and
after him the kings continued to sojourn there. When he had become sovereign of Egypt, El Melek El Zaher
Beïbars El Bondoqdari established relays in all the directions, so well that a piece of news could be sent
from the Citadel of the Mountain and arrive in four days at Damascus, and vice versa. He received news from
all the points of the Empire twice a week, and, while remaining himself at the Citadel, dispatched through all
the kingdom the destitutions and the nominations. He had to spend considerable sums to achieve the
organization of this relay, which was completely finished in 659 [6 December 1260 to 25 November 1261]. These
posts continued to function between Cairo and

[PDF p. 704]

[OF THE ROUTE THAT LEADS FROM MASR TO DAMASCUS, continued]

Damascus, and in each district one found numerous horses ready to be mounted that one named "post-horses";
with them were grooms and special men named "piqueurs" (drivers) who, if one required it, mounted on the
post-horses, pushed the mount of the traveler, and served him during all the duration of the voyage. No one
could make use of these horses except on an express order of the sultan; sometimes one forbade absolutely the
use of them to any traveler not charged with the service of the sultan; sometimes also some notable procured
this authorization and could then mount them for his voyage. The route of Syria was very frequented, and the
traveler found at each relay all of which he had need, victuals and fodder. And these routes were so safe
that, according to what one has told us, a woman went alone from Cairo into Syria, on horseback or on foot,
without carrying victuals or water. When Timour Lenk (Tamerlane), having seized Damascus in 803 [22 August
1400 to 10 August 1401], had reduced to slavery the inhabitants and burned the town, the post-relays were
abandoned, and the population, desolated by the scourge that overwhelmed the country and the innumerable
calamities that fell on it, could not occupy itself with their re-establishment. The route of Syria was little
by little abandoned, then completely forsaken. It has remained in this state until present -- that is, in the
year 818 [13 March 1415 to 28 February 1416].

[PDF p. 705]

CHAPTER LXIV
OF THE TOWN OF HATEIN

The ruins of this town are seen still between Habouah and El 'Aqoulab, on the territory of this last, in the
region that extends from Qatiah to El 'Arish. Facing it and about a mile distant is a fountain of sweet water
named by the Arabs (fountain) of Abou el 'Arouq; this fountain is to the east of the town. This locality takes
its name from Hateïn, or, according to others, Hatti ben El Melek Abou Gad El Madiani. The inhabitants of
Qatia give today to the region the name of country of Hateïn and country of Gofar. This Hateïn reigned over
Egypt after the death of his father. He was bellicose and violent and resided in a citadel of the mountains of
the Jordan near Tiberias. It is from him that takes its name the town of Hateïn, where one sees the tomb of
Sho'aib, in the vicinity of Safad.

[PDF p. 706]

CHAPTER LXV
OF THE TOWN OF EL RAQAH

This town is one of the localities of Madian, between the sea of Qolzoum and the mountain of El Tour. At the
epoch when Moses made the Israelites come out of Egypt, this town was inhabited by a tribe of Lakhm related to
Pharaoh and that adored the ox. It is to this people that God makes allusion, when he says: "And with the
Israelites we crossed the sea, and they arrived among a people who adore the idols" (Koran, VII, 134); all the
verse concerns them. This tribe of Lakhm, says Qotadah, inhabited El Raqah. They had, it is said, for idol a
statue of an ox; it is for this that the Samaritan produced for them a calf. The traces of this town subsist
still today in what one sees of Faran, of Qolzoum, of Madian, and of Aïlah, regions traversed by the nomads.

[PDF p. 707]

CHAPTER LXVI
OF 'AIN SHAMS

This town formerly was called Ra'msâs, and Aïn Shams was a temple where one went on pilgrimage from all the
points of the horizon; it was one of those ancient temples to which the pilgrims flocked. The Sabeans had
received these temples from 'Ad and Tamoud, according to some; from Seth, son of Adam, and from Hermes the
Ancient or Idris, according to others. This Idris was the first who treated of the supreme essence and of the
celestial movements and built temples to adore God there. One says that, in the times of old, there were
twelve temples: the temple of the First Cause, the temple of the Intelligence, the temple of the Government,
the temple of the Exterior Form, the temple of the Soul; these five temples were of circular form. The sixth
temple was that of Saturn, of hexagonal form; then came the temple of Jupiter of triangular form, that of Mars
of square form; the temple of the Sun, square equally; the temple of Venus, having the form of an elongated
triangle; the temple of Mercury in the form of a triangle and containing in the interior a rectangular
construction; finally the temple of the Moon, of octagonal form. The cult by the temples took a considerable
extension among the Sabeans. For, they claimed, as the Creator of the world is too holy to have been able to
be born, a human creature could not comprehend him, and consequently his adorers, to approach him, had to make
use of the intermediary of those who approached him the most -- that is, the genii who could intercede for
them and serve as mediators between them and the Divinity. By the genii, they understood the angels whom they
supposed charged with the direction of the 7 planets in their firmaments -- that is, in their temples; and
necessarily each spirit had a temple and each temple had a firmament; and between the spirit and the temple
there was a relation similar to that of the soul to the body; and of course there was relation between the
intermediary and the creatures on one part and the Creator on the other, in such a fashion that the creature
has only to turn toward the intermediary spirit to obtain from the Creator what it needs. In

[PDF p. 708]

consequence, they went to the temples where the planets reigned, recognized their emplacements in the
firmament, studied their risings and their settings, their influences nefarious or happy on the days, the
nights, the hours, the persons, the exterior forms, the climates, etc.; finally all that is taught in its
place in the books of astronomy. They named these seven planets "The Lords" and "The Gods," giving to the sun
the title of "God of the Gods" and of "Lord of the Lords"; it was it that distributed its light in the course
of the year where one finds clearly its trace. And they made sacrifices at the temples, offering their gifts
to the genii, so that in their turn these might offer them to the Creator, for they esteemed that the temples
were the bodies of the genii and that all that is offered to a person is offered thus to its soul. To each
planet they addressed their prayers during a day that they regarded as depending on this planet. Their prayers
were made at three determined moments of the day: the first at the rising of the sun, the second at the moment
when this star passes the middle of the sky, and the third at its setting. They invoked Saturn on Saturday,
Jupiter on Sunday, Mars on Monday, the Sun on Tuesday, Venus on Wednesday, Mercury on Thursday, and the Moon
on Friday. There existed, it is said, at Balkh a temple raised by the Himyarites to the Moon to rival the
Ka'bah. The Persians came there on pilgrimage and had hung it with silk. This temple was called Nou bahr. When
they had embraced the religion of the Magi, the Persians made of it a temple of fire whose overseer bore the
title of Barmak -- that is, Vali of Mecca. The function of Barmak continued until the grandfather of Khaled,
grandfather of Ga'far ben Yahia ben Khaled, who embraced Islamism into the hands of Hesham ben 'Abd el Melek
and took the name of Abd Allah. The temple was destroyed by Qeis ben El Heisham at the beginning of the
caliphate of Mo'awiah in the year 41 [7 May 661 to 25 April 662]. It was a colossal construction surrounded by
porticoes and 360 chambers where lodged the servants of the temple. There was formerly at Sanaa the palace of
Rhamdân, one of the monuments raised by El Dahak. It was a temple dedicated to the Moon and that was destroyed
under the caliphate of Othman ben 'Afan. In Spain, in the mountain of El Fareq that separates the peninsula
from the continent, existed a temple of Jupiter built by Cleopatra daughter of Ptolemy. At Farghanah, there
was a

[PDF p. 709]

[OF 'AIN SHAMS, continued]

monument called Colousan and that was a temple of the Sun built by one of the first kings of Persia; it was
destroyed by El Mo'tasem. One is not in agreement on the constructor of the temple of 'Aïn Shams; but I will
reunite on this temple a quantity of accounts that one finds gathered in no other book.

When, says Ibn Ouasif Shah, the king Menqâous mounted on horseback, one made before him the most astonishing
representations (spectacles); the crowd pressed to admire the execution of them. This king had built for
himself for prayer a particular temple, in which he placed a cupola containing the image of the sun and of the
planets, and which he surrounded with statues and marvelous objects. There he went on horseback and stayed for
seven days; he raised there two columns on which he inscribed the date of the construction, and these two
columns exist still at present; it is the place that one calls 'Aïn Shams. He had transported treasures,
talismans, drugs, and marvelous objects that he buried at 'Aïn Shams and in the surroundings. After a reign of
91 years, this king died of the plague according to some, of poison according to others; one dug him a tomb
in the desert of the Occident or, according to another version, to the Occident of Qous; one buried with him
books of science and of art, statues of gold, precious stones, a considerable quantity of coined gold. At the
same time one buried the statue of the genie of the Sun in brilliant gold with two wings of emeralds, and the
image of his wife: he loved her much and, when she died, he had her statue placed in all the temples. This
statue was of gold with two black tresses and bore a mantle of precious stones disposed with art; the woman
was represented seated on a throne, and the king had her placed before him everywhere he sat himself, to try
to console himself for her loss. This statue was buried with him and placed at his feet, as if it addressed
the word to him.

The virtuous sage Ahmed ben Khalifat, in his book entitled "Essences of the news regarding the categories of
medicines," reports this: Pythagoras, ardently desiring to unite himself with the priests who were in Egypt,
went to the people of the town of the Sun, called today 'Aïn Shams, who received him reluctantly and put him
long to the test without finding him either defect or insufficiency. They conducted him therefore to the
priests of Memphis who were to complete his examination; these received him also with repugnance and examined
him

[PDF p. 710]

minutely without finding anything to reproach him, nor catching him at fault; they sent him to the
inhabitants of Diosos to have him examined. But these last could not catch him at fault nor refute his
arguments. They imposed on him difficult tests, so that he could not realize them and that they might succeed
thus in setting him aside and rejecting him, in imposing on him tests different from the Greek tests.
Pythagoras accepted and executed them. The priests had for him a great veneration and the rumor of the piety
of Pythagoras spread in Egypt and reached the king Amasis. This prince accorded him a right on the tariffs of
the sacrifices made to the gods as well as on all the offerings, which was forbidden to foreigners. It is
reported that the seven planets had temples where one came on pilgrimage from all points of the earth; these
temples had been raised by the workers who had edified for each planet a temple in one of the regions of the
world. One thought that the first temple was the Kaaba, of which the pilgrimage was prescribed by Idris whom
the Egyptians name Hermes the Ancient, the Trismegistus. This temple, one believes, was dedicated to Saturn.
The second temple was that of Mars, raised at Tyre on the coast of Syria. The third, raised to Jupiter, had
been constructed at Damascus by Giroun ben Sa'd ben 'Ad; it is on its emplacement that rises today the mosque
of the Umayyads. The fourth temple, that of the Sun, was in Egypt; it was, it is said, one of the monuments
constructed by Harshik, one of the kings of the first Persian dynasty; this temple is the one that one calls
'Aïn Shams. The fifth temple, raised to Venus, was at Mantih; the sixth, that of Mercury, was at Saïda on the
coast of Syria; the seventh finally, that of the Moon, was at Harran, of which it is, it is said, the Citadel
and that one calls the circular; it remained standing until the arrival of the Tatars, who overturned it; it
was, as one claims, the greatest temple of the Sabeans.

Shafé ben Aly, in his book entitled "Marvels of the countries," says that 'Aïn Shams is a small town of which
the wall of enclosure, half ruined, is still seen; one recognizes clearly that it was a temple of adoration
where were terrible idols of monstrous form carved in the stone; each statue was thirty cubits high and the
body was carved proportionally to this colossal height. All these statues were raised on pedestals, of which
some of a marvelous plan and admirable dispositions. The gate of the town

[PDF p. 711]

is seen still today. On these immense stones are drawn figures of men and animals and engraved numerous texts,
in unknown characters. One does not meet a single stone that does not bear either writing or a drawing. In
this town are the two well-known obelisks that one calls the obelisks of the Pharaoh. The obelisk reposes on a
pedestal of square form of a vertical section of 10 square cubits and of about 10 cubits in width; this
vertical base is posed on foundations solidly established in the soil, supports in its turn a triangular (?)
and conical column measuring more than a hundred cubits in height, of a diameter of five cubits at the base
and terminating in a point. The summit was covered with a chaperon of copper of a height of about three cubits
in the form of a funnel; but it has been oxidized by the rains and the duration of the ages; it has become
green, and this color has run on the faces of the obelisk. These faces are covered with writings in unknown
characters. The two obelisks were formerly standing, but one of them has fallen and has been broken in two
because of its enormous weight; one has taken the copper of the summit. Around were innumerable statues whose
height reached or nearly the half of the height of the obelisk. Rarely, among these small obelisks, does one
meet some that are of a single piece. They are on the contrary formed of superposed courses. Most have been
destroyed, and there remains of them only the pedestal.

Mohammed ben Ibrahim El Gazari reports, in his History, that the 4th of Ramadan of the year 656 [4 September
1258] one of the obelisks of the Pharaoh of the district of Matarieh in the surroundings of Cairo fell, and
one found in the interior 200 qantars of copper, and from the cap of the summit one withdrew 10,000 dinars.

One says that 'Aïn Shams was built by El Oualid ben Douma, one of the Amalecite kings; according to others the
foundation of it would be due to El Rian ben El Oualid, of whom it was the capital. The Persians claim that
its founder was Harshik.

The height of the two columns is, according to certain authors, 100 cubits, according to others, 84 or even
50; one claims that it was Bokht Nasar (Nebuchadnezzar) who destroyed Heliopolis, at the time of his entry
into Egypt. 'Aïn

[PDF p. 712]

Shams, says El Qoda'i, is the temple of the Sun, where rise the two columns so marvelous that one has never
seen anything more beautiful, nor even anything that approaches it. They are about 50 cubits high and are
posed on the surface of the soil. Between the two of them stands the statue of a man mounted on a courser.
They are terminated by two points of copper. When the Nile rises, one sees distinctly the water seep drop by
drop from their summit, descend until it flows in moving away from their foot; at their base grow brambles and
other plants. At the moment when the sun penetrates the first minute of the sign of Capricorn -- that is, the
shortest day of the year -- this star reaches the most southern of the two obelisks and culminates at its
summit; when it reaches the first minute of the sign of Cancer -- that is, the longest day of the year -- it
reaches the northern obelisk and culminates at its summit. These two obelisks form therefore the two extreme
points of the solar balancing, and the line of the equator (sic) passes exactly between the two of them. The
going and coming of the year is therefore comprised between these two obelisks; it is at least what the
competent scholars say.

Ibn Sa'id, in the work entitled "The Occident," asserts that in antiquity 'Aïn Shams was a town very long and
very wide, and that extended to the constructions of ancient Masr, there where is today Fostat. During his
expedition, 'Amr ben El 'As had stopped at 'Aïn Shams and, thanks to the army he had gathered, seized it.

The compiler of the History of the Toulounides reports that there was at 'Aïn Shams a statue tall as a man of
medium stature, in white stone of Keddan (limestone) and of a perfect workmanship; it seemed to whoever saw it
endowed with speech. One spoke of it to Ahmed ben Touloun, who was desirous to see it at leisure; but
Nadoussah attempted to prevent him from it and said to him: "Never has a vali seen it without having been
overturned." He went there nevertheless on horseback. It was in the year 258 [18 November 871 to 6 November
872]; he examined it, then returned to give the order to the stone-cutters to remove it from the earth and to
leave no trace of it, then he said to Nadoussah, his treasurer: "O Nadoussah, who, of the statue or of me, has
overturned the master?" "It is you, O emir," answered Nadoussah. And Ahmed lived still 12 years as emir.

[PDF p. 713]

El 'Aziz billah Nezar ben El Mo'ezz constructed palaces at Aïn Shams. Aïn Shams, says Abou 'Obeïd Bakri, is a
source of water well known. 'Aïn Shams, says Mohammed ben Habib, is where Pharaoh built the citadel. The
people are of the opinion that 'Aïn Shams owes its name to this water, and the first who gave it this name was
Seba ben Yashgeb. According to El Kalbi, Shams is the name of an antique idol. The two columns of 'Aïn Shams in
Egypt, says Ibn Khardadabeh, are the remains of the columns that were there. At their summit was a cap of
copper; one of these columns let seep from under this cap a water that flowed slowly to the middle of the
column without passing it, and this stillation interrupted itself neither night nor day. The trace of the
water on the column is of a humid green, but does not extend to the soil. It is one of the monuments raised by
Aushenk.

Mohammed ben Abd el Rahim, in his book entitled "Gift to the spirits," says: These minarets are square and a
hundred cubits high and of a single piece sharpened at the summit and posed on a pedestal of stone. On the
summit of these minarets is an envelope of copper similar to gold, where is the image of a man seated on a
throne turned toward the Orient. From this envelope of copper escapes a thread of water that descends to ten
cubits (from the summit) and that makes grow some herbs, such as the talhab. This water shows itself in all
times, summer and winter, and nothing of it descends to the soil. At 'Aïn Shams grows a sort of plant, the
balsam, from which one draws the oil of balsam and that grows only in this place. One employs for this the
bark of this plant. It has a certain savor hot and pungent very agreeable. In the region of Matarieh, in the
vicinity of 'Aïn Shams, grows the balsam, a sort of small shrub watered by the water of a well that is in the
region. This well is held in great consideration by the Christians, who go to wash themselves there and to ask
for healing. The harvest is made at the wished moment by employees whom the sultan designates. One keeps it to
carry it to the magazines of the sultan whence one sends it to the citadels of Syria and into the hospitals to
heal the feverish. It is impossible to procure any elsewhere than at the royal magazines and with a special
permission. The Christian kings -- Abyssinian, Greek, and Frankish -- prized it

[PDF p. 714]

[OF 'AIN SHAMS, continued]

at a very high price and made presents to the king of Egypt to obtain some of it, and they esteemed that no
one among them was truly Christian if this balsam was not mixed with the water of baptism, and believed firmly
that one had to add to the water of baptism a little of the essence of balsam that they named miroun. In
antiquity, when a piece of news came from Syria, it arrived first to the master of 'Aïn Shams, then from there
set out again for the citadel that one named Qasr El Shama', there where is now the town of Masr, from the
citadel to Memphis, capital of the kingdom. The cause of the veneration of the Christians for the essence of
balsam is exposed in the Synaxar, the book that contains the accounts of the Christians. When Mary and Joseph
the carpenter left Jerusalem to flee Herod, king of the Jews, the first town of Egypt where they stopped was
Bosta. It was the 24th of Bachans. The inhabitants refusing to receive them, they had to establish themselves
outside the town and stayed there a long time, then they directed themselves toward Samanoud where they
crossed the Nile, and, arrived on the western bank, took the direction of Ashmounein. On the culminating point
of the town rose then an image of copper representing a horse posed on four columns and that neighed when
another approached it, and the inhabitants ran to see which were the strangers who arrived; and when Mary
arrived with the Messiah near the town, the copper horse fell and broke into pieces. The mother having entered
with the child, a prodigy manifested itself at Ashmouneïn: five loaded camels obstructing their passage, the
Messiah invoked (God) against them at Ashmouneïn and the animals were changed into stones. From there, the
travelers set out and stopped a long time in a village named Files which they left then to go to the town of
Qos and Qâm, today El Qoussiah. The demon spoke by the mouth of the idols of the town and announced to the
inhabitants that a woman had come with her child to destroy the temple of their gods. About a hundred men came
out in arms to repel the travelers, who withdrew toward Mirah, to the west of El Qoussiah, and stopped at the
place called today Deïr el Moharraq, where they remained six months and some days. There, Joseph had a dream
and heard someone who announced to him the death of Herod and ordered him to return to Jerusalem with the
Messiah. They left therefore Mirah and, arrived at the place named today Qasr El Shama, in the town of Masr,
stopped in a grotto that

[PDF p. 715]

bears now the name of Church of Bou Sergah (Saint Serge) and went from there to 'Aïn Shams. They made a halt
in this place near a fountain where Mary washed the garments of the Messiah. After having wrung the linens,
she spread them on the soil, where God made grow the balsam that grew then in the Jordan, whence it
disappeared to be found no more than on this territory, and the well that one sees there today filled itself
with the water of which Mary had made use to wash the garments of the Messiah. And one has recounted to me
that even today still, if one looks closely there, the water of this well is formed by a source that springs
in its depths. Such is the cause of the veneration that the Christians have for this well and for the balsam
that is brought only by this water. And God is the most knowing.

[PDF p. 716]

CHAPTER LXVII
EL MANSOURAH

This locality is situated at the point of the branch of Ashmoum, facing the district of Talkha. It was founded
by the sultan El Kamel Nasr el din Mohammed ben El Melek El 'Adel Abou Bekr ben Ayoub in the year 616 [19
March 1219 to 7 March 1220], at the epoch when the Franks had made themselves masters of Damietta. The sultan,
having made a halt in this place, planted there his tents, built there a palace, and ordered all those who
were with him, emirs and soldiers, to construct; and one edified numerous houses, one established there
markets, the whole was protected on the side of the river by a wall that one garnished with war-machines and
shelters; the new town was named El Mansourah. The sultan resided there until the retaking of Damietta, as we
have said above in the chapter of this book that treats of the town of Damietta. El Mansourah became a
considerable town with baths, hostelries, and markets. El Melek el Kamel having retaken Damietta from the
Franks, these having departed for their country, the sultan held session in his palace of Mansourah with his
brothers El Melek El Mo'azem 'Eïsa, prince of Damascus, and El Melek El Ashraf Mousa, prince of the countries
of the Orient, and other personages of his family and of his house. On an order given by El Melek El Ashraf to
one of his slaves, she set about singing to her lute:

[verses:] When Pharaoh and his people, filled with pride, came toward Egypt to devastate the land, Mousa
(Moses) advanced toward them, a staff in his hand, and drowned them in the sea, one on top of another.

El Ashraf, transported with joy, cried: "In the name of God, repeat," but this displeased El Melek El Kamel
who imposed silence on him and said to his slave: "Sing, you." And she, having taken her lute, sang:

[verses:] O sectaries of an impious religion, rise up and look at what has happened and has renewed itself in
our time.

[PDF p. 717]

[verses:] Servants of Eisa (Jesus), Eisa and his partisans, and Mousa (Moses), all have carried rescue to
Mohammed.

This distich is drawn from the Qasidah of Sharaf el din ben Habarah, which begins thus:

[verses:] My love permits me only to keep vigil.

El Melek El Kamel, full of admiration, had given to the two slaves 500 dinars. The cadi, the most illustrious
chief, the chief Habbah Allah ben Mohassen, cadi of Gaza, who was among the assistants, rose standing and set
about reciting:

[verses:] Be happy, for the happiness has come to stay always. The Clement has accomplished his promise of
victory. The Creator has accorded us a victory brilliant, and has filled us with benefits and with an eternal
glory. The face of the earth, before morose, sets itself again to smile, and the visage of the impious has
been rendered black by their crimes. The sea was swollen by the great number of infidels it carried, and the
waves broke foaming against their ships. There rose then for our religion a man who handled it as one handles
a cutting sword. There remained on the field of battle only the bodies cut by the sword, or the prisoners with
bound hands. The Creation entire cried out, raising the voice on the two faces of the Universe and singing:
Servants of Eisa (Jesus), Eisa and his partisans, and Mousa (Moses), all have carried rescue to Mohammed.

This night, passed at Mansourah, was one of the most beautiful that ever a king passed. In reciting these
verses, the cadi Habbah Allah, in pronouncing the name of Eïsa, designated with his finger Eisa El Mo'azem, in
pronouncing the name of Mousa, he designated Mousa El Ashraf, and in pronouncing the name of Mohammed, he
designated the sultan El Melek El Kamel. According to another version, the one who recited these verses was
Rageh El Mohali, the poet.

[PDF p. 718]

CHAPTER LXVIII
EL 'ABBASSAH

This locality is situated between Balbeïs and Salahieh in the country of Sedir. It was always a place of
pleasure for the kings. It is there that was born El Abbas ben Ahmed ben Touloun, it is for this that his
father gave him this name; it is there also that was born El Melek El Amgad Taqi el din 'Abbas ben El 'Adel
Abou Bekr ben Ayoub. El Melek El Kamel Mohammed ben Adel sojourned there much. "This land," he said, "is
preferable to Masr; when I reside there I can hunt there the birds of the sky, the fish of the waters, the
beasts of the plains. From the citadel of the mountain one brings me the bread to my residence, and it is
still hot." He had constructed there a palace, belvederes, gardens; his emirs built there also quantity of
houses in the gardens. 'Abbassah remained thus until the moment when El Melek El Saleh Negm el din Ayoub ben
El Kamel raised his residence of Salahieh; from then on 'Abbassah was neglected; its belvederes were destroyed
under the reign of El Melek El Mo'ezz Aïbek. And when arrived the reign of El Melek El Zaher Rokn El din
Bïebars, this prince, passing at Sedir at the mouth of the valley, was marveled at it and had built in a
chosen place a village that he named Zaherieh; he founded there a mosque, and that, in the year 666 [22
September 1267 to 10 September 1268].

This town takes its name from Abbassah, daughter of Ahmed ben Touloun, for this princess went to this place to
make her farewells to her niece Qotr el Nada, daughter of Khamaraouyah ben Ahmed ben Touloun, at the epoch when
the latter was sent to the caliph Mo'taded. There, 'Abbassah planted her tents, constructed a village, and
gave it her name.

[PDF p. 719]

CHAPTER LXIX
OF THE TOWN OF QOFT IN THE SAID OF EGYPT

This town owes its name to Qaftarim ben Qobtim ben Misraïm ben Beïsar ben Ham ben Nouh. It was formerly an
(important) town of the climes, but it began to decline after the year 400 of the Hijra of the Prophet [25
August 1019 to 15 August 1020]. After the year 700 of the Hijra [19 September 1300 to 5 September 1301], there
remained of it no more than forty sugar-works and six presses for canes. There, it is said, the houses were
surmounted by cupolas, and the inhabitants who possessed (at least) ten thousand dinars were recognized by the
cupola that surmounted their house. In the vicinity of Qoft are quarries of emeralds that have been abandoned
only since a short time. Qaftarim took the power after his father Qobtim. He was, says Ibn Ouacif Shah, the
eldest and the most cherished of the children of his father. He was bold, and of great stature, and it is he
who threw the foundations of the pyramids of Dahchour and elsewhere. He built also the town of Dendérah and
the town of the Idols. At the end of his reign, 'Ad was destroyed by the wind. He obtained in the mines more
metals than any of his predecessors. He had extracted ingots of gold as big as the millstones, emeralds
enormous as pillars, and in the desert of the Occident blocks of ceruse big as donjons. He made a quantity of
marvelous things. He raised on the mountain of Qoft a tower from which one saw the Eastern sea, and he
discovered in this same mountain mines of mercury of which he made statues tall as mountains that did not
disaggregate nor liquefy. He had also dug the pond that one calls Siadat El Teïr (the hunter of birds): if a
bird passed above this pond, it fell into it and could not budge until one had taken it. This pond, it is
said, exists still today. As for the tower, it has collapsed. The king had executed numerous marvels, and it
is from his time that began the cult of the idols that were drowned by the Flood and that the demon had, by
perfidy, made adored by the peoples. This prince, it is said, founded also the towns of

[PDF p. 720]

the interior and placed there marvelous objects; to the west of the Nile, beyond the oases of the interior, he
built towns that he provided with numerous marvels to which were attached protecting genii; no one could
approach these towns nor enter there without first making his offering to these spirits. Qaftarim reigned 480
years, and the greatest part of the marvelous objects were executed by him and by his son Boudsir. Thus the
Said possessed more marvels than the Delta; Qaftarim resided there. When death approached, the prince had made
for himself a naos in the western mountain, near the town of the priests, in a subterranean corridor backed on
vaults descending to the soil. He carved in the mountain a vast palace surrounded by niches hollowed in the
wall; he reserved in the ceiling a corridor for the passage of the air, and he had the soil and the rest of
the edifice paved with marble. In the middle of the chamber, he had raised a bench posed on eight feet and
covered with fused crystal of diverse colors; in the ceiling were placed luminous stones and at each angle of
the bench statues of gold holding in hand trumpets into which they blew. Under the cupola, another bench
plated with gold and mounted with emeralds; on the bench a bed of silk where his body was placed after having
been coated with preservative aromatics. Near him were deposited the censers of camphor, and the body was
clothed in robes lamé with gold, the face remaining uncovered. He was crowned with the royal crown, and near
the bench stood four statues of hollow glass representing women provided with fans of gold. On his chest, and
over the garments, was deposited a precious sword with a hilt of emerald. One deposited in the magazines the
treasures of the king, ingots of gold, crowns, precious stones, hieroglyphs treating of the sciences, and all
sorts of drugs and talismans, and books of science in innumerable quantity. On the door one fixed a cock of
gold perched on a pedestal of green glass, the wings extended; on this cock were engraved preservative
formulas. At the entrance of each of the vaults one had raised two statues of copper holding in hand swords
and the feet posed on flagstones under which was hidden a mechanism. Whoever approached these statues was
struck by their swords and died. At the ceiling of each vault was suspended a ball coated with a prepared
unguent that remained luminous indefinitely. The door of the vaults was closed by blocks of lead; above were
deposited enormous flagstones, and the interstices were filled with sand. At the door of the corridor one
wrote: "This is

[PDF p. 721]

the entrance that leads to the body of the superb, redoubted, generous, and vigorous king Qaftarim, endowed
with valiance and with power, with force and with victory. His star has eclipsed itself, but his memory and
his souvenir have remained. And no one will be able to penetrate to him nor reach by any means before there
have been accomplished seven hundred seventy revolutions of years."

The mine of emerald, says El Masa'oudi, is found in the upper Said, in the district of Qoft. It is from this
town that one goes to the mine, which is situated at the place that bears the name of El Kharbah, an ensemble
of valleys and of mountains. The Bedjahs are charged with the guard of El Kharbah. They serve, by means of a
salary, as escort to those who wish to go to dig the soil to find emeralds. Experienced people of the Said who
had frequented this mine and knew well this sort of stone claim that it is either more abundant or more rare
according to the seasons of the year; it is more abundant when the state of the air is firmer and more stable
and when blows a certain one of the four winds; the green color of the stone becomes more frank and its
brilliance more luminous in the first days of the month; this brilliance reaches its maximum at the moment of
the full moon. Between El Kharbah, there where is found the mine of emeralds, and the nearest inhabited
locality, there are seven days' march. These localities are Qoft, Qous, and other towns of the Said. Qous is
situated on the bank of the Nile; as for Qoft, it is distant from the river by about two miles.

There are on the two towns of Qoft and of Qous marvelous accounts that treat of their foundation. In the
Chronicles of the Copts, one recounts that already at this epoch Qoft began to decline, while Qous was more
prosperous and more peopled. There was at Qoft a temple placed under the guard of a genie in the form of a
young black girl carrying a small black child; one affirms even having seen her several times. The mine of
emerald was situated on the shore of the Nile where is found also Assouan; there was for this mine a special
divan with employees and accountants. This divan pays the workers who work there as well as the expenses
necessitated for the excavations and the extraction of the emerald. This mine is found in sandy mountains: the
sand in which one digs has many times collapsed, killing a certain number of workers. After having gathered
the product of the mine, one dispatched it to Fostat, whence one dispatched it into all the countries. The
people put eight days of average march to go from Qous to the mine of emerald;

[PDF p. 722]

all around and in proximity resided the Bedjahs who were held to watch over and guard the mines. These are
situated in a mountain that runs to the east of the Nile, to the north of an enormous massif that forms part
of this mountain and that one names Aqarshandat; there is not in the region a higher mountain. The mine is in
a part of the territory where is found no dwelling; the place itself and its surroundings are absolutely
deserted. The water itself is at more than a half-day's march; this water is furnished only by the rains and
deposits itself in a sort of pool that augments when the rains are strong and diminishes when they are weak.
The mine is in the middle of a long gorge formed of a white stone, from which one extracts the emerald. This
white stone is of three sorts: the talk of camphor, the talk of silver, and the geraoui stone. One strikes on
this stone until comes out the emerald that is there as if drowned. There are several species of emeralds:
one, the riani emerald, is little abundant and is found only rarely. As soon as it is extracted, one throws it
into hot oil, then one puts it into cotton, and one envelops the whole in a piece of rag or of any stuff
whatsoever. The surveillance exercised in these mines is very severe; the workers are examined each day at the
exit, and the most secret parts of their body do not escape the examination. Despite this, they succeed, by
means of their own, in stealing some stones. One continued to extract emeralds from this mine until the moment
when the vizier El Saheb 'Alam el din 'Abd Allah ben Zanbour suspended the works there, in the time of El
Melek El Naser Hassan ben Mohammed ben Qalaoun, in the year 760 [3 December 1358 to 22 November 1359] and some.

In the year 572 [10 July 1176 to 29 June 1177], there was at Qoft a great uprising: a missionary (da'i) of the
tribe of the Benou Abd El Qaoui, having passed himself off as Daoud ben El 'Adhed (the last Fatimid caliph),
had gathered around him a crowd of people. The sultan Salah el din Youssef ben Ayoub sent a troop on the
orders of his brother El Melek El 'Adel Abou Bekr ben Ayoub who made perish nearly 3,000 inhabitants of Qoft;
they were hanged from the trees outside the town, by means of their turbans and their robes.

[PDF p. 723]

CHAPTER LXX
OF THE TOWN OF DENDERAH

It is one of the antique towns of the upper Said, built by Qaftarim ben Misraïm ben Beïsar ben Ham ben Nouh.
There was found there a magnificent temple provided with a hundred eighty windows through each of which
entered each day the sun until it had arrived at the last; from there it retrograded to its point of
departure. The spirit that watched over this temple appeared in the form of a man with a lion's head and two
horns. There was there also a tree that one called "the tree of Abbas." This tree, of ordinary size, had green
and round leaves. If, in passing near it, someone said: "O tree of Abbas, the axe comes on you," its leaves
folded back and faded at once and returned then to their primitive state. Between Denderah and Qous, there is
the distance of a barid. The temple of Denderah was more beautiful than that of Akhmim.

[PDF p. 724]

CHAPTER LXXI
OF THE OASES OF THE INTERIOR

The oases are separated lands situated in the Southwest; they form part of no vilayet nor of any province, and
no vali administers them on behalf of the Sultan; he who administers them does it for the account of the one
who has received them in fief.

The region of the oases is comprised between Masr, Alexandria, the Said, Nubia, and Ethiopia; the oases are
situated one behind the other. They form a country living by itself, without being linked to any other and
without having need of any other. It is a land abundant in alum, in vitriol, in acid springs whose water is
employed like vinegar, in springs whose taste presents at once a savor acid, astringent, and salty. Each of
these waters has its special utility. One divides these oases into two categories: the oases of the interior
and the oases of the exterior, the whole forming four oases. They saw born, it is said, Haouil ben Koush ben
Kana'an ben Ham ben Nouh; then came Seba ben Koush, the father of the Abyssinians; Abou Shanba ben Koush, the
father of the Zaghaouah; and Abou Shefabiah ben Koush, the father of the Ramram Abyssinians.

One recounts, says Ibn Ouacif Shah, that Qaftarim constructed the towns of the interior and did there
marvelous things, among others, a water that held itself standing in the form of a column without
disaggregating nor flowing; from him also is the pond named Falesthin -- that is, the taker of birds; indeed,
if a bird passed above this pond, it fell into it and could no longer come out until one came to take it. He
made also a column of stone surmounted by the image of a bird; if lions, serpents, or other malevolent beasts
approached the town, the bird pushed a strident whistle that put these beasts to flight. At the four gates of
this town, he had raised four statues of copper of which a stranger could not approach without being seized
with a profound sleep; he fell asleep near the statue and could awaken only if the people of the town came to
blow on his face to

[PDF p. 725]

recall him to himself. If they neglected to do it, the sleeper continued his sleep near the statue, and ended
it only at death. This same prince constructed an elegant turret of colored glass, posed on a pedestal of
copper and surmounted by a statue made of a great number of mixed substances and holding in hand a bow from
which it seemed to launch arrows. If a stranger carried his eyes on the statue, he remained fixed in his place
until the people of the town came to him. This statue placed itself by itself in the direction of the four
winds. It is there still today, it is said, but one abstains from going to this town, despite the considerable
quantity of treasures and marvels that one meets there, for fear of this statue, for one dreads to let one's
eyes fall on it. It remained standing until it destroyed itself. A certain king wished to throw it down, but
he could not succeed, and in this attempt, a great number of people perished. One recounts that Qaftarim
raised in one of the towns of the interior a mirror where one could see all that one asked of it; he built
also to the west of the Nile and beyond the oases of the interior, towns where he executed numerous marvels;
he charged with watching over them spirits that defended the approach of them, and no one could either
approach or enter there without having first carried offerings to these spirits. One can still go today to
this town, and one takes there what one wishes of the treasures without obstacle and without difficulty. The
king Sa ben El Sad, or, according to others, Sa ben Marqounos, had constructed, in the interior of the oases,
a town that he had surrounded with plantations of numerous palms. This king resided at Memphis and reigned
over all the provinces; he made marvelous objects and talismans, and rendered to the priests their rank,
chased the people of vice and of debauchery who had been the companions of El Sad ben Marqounos. He posted at
the extreme points of Egypt messengers charged with informing him of what happened at their frontiers, and he
had raised, to the west of the Nile, towers on which one lit fires if something occurred or if someone
advanced from this side. When he was master of his country entire, he gathered around him the sages, and
examined the stars, an art in which he was very skilled. He saw there that his country would be infallibly
drowned by the overflowing of its Nile and that it would be ruined by a man who would come from the side of
Syria. He gathered therefore all the workers of Egypt and had built, in the extreme oasis, a town whose
rampart reached fifty cubits in height, and he gathered there the sciences and the riches. It is this town
that Mousa

[PDF p. 726]

ben Nouseïr met, in the time of the Umayyads, when he came from the Magreb; when he penetrated into Egypt, he
sought to find the extreme oasis of which he had heard speak; he remained seven days wandering in the sands,
between the West and the South; finally a town appeared to him provided with a rampart and gates of iron. It
was impossible for him to open the gates; some men, having mounted on the ramparts, had no sooner looked at
the interior of the town than they threw themselves into it. Not being able to come to the end of the mystery
of this town, Mousa passed on after having lost a great number of his companions. In this desert, many people
had houses of pleasure, marvelous villas, and treasures; but all that has been covered by the sands, although
all the kings strove to construct, against the sand, talismans whose virtue has obliterated itself with time.
No one could fail to recognize the enormous quantity of the constructions of these peoples, or of their towns,
or of all the magnificent monuments they founded, for this people had a boldness that no other has had. And
traces of it are still manifest, like the pyramids, the stelae, Alexandria, the vestiges that one meets in the
desert of the Orient, the mountains they hollowed to deposit their treasures there, the valleys cut by the
hand of man, and all that one can see in the Said in the way of temples, and all that they engraved in
testimony of their science. Let one say to all the kings of the earth to construct two monuments similar to
the two pyramids, they will not arrive at it; similarly, were they to wish to engrave a temple, the time would
flow, and they could not succeed at it.

One recounts that a troop of masons of the village of the West, to escape the vexations of one of their
governors, had taken refuge, with provisions, in the desert of the West, until, their affair being arranged,
they could return. Now, after the first day's march and a part of the second, they had directed themselves
toward the foot of a mountain and had found there a domestic ass that had come out of a path. One of them
followed it and ended at dwellings with trees, palms, and running waters. There, men guarded herds and had
their dwellings. He spoke to them and was surprised at what he heard; he went to seek his companions and with
them returned to these people who interrogated them on their situation. They informed them and stayed with
them until their affairs were arranged. They set out then to go seek their families and their herds and to
return to install themselves among the unknown people. But they had much marched

[PDF p. 727]

a very long time, they could not find again the road nor return to the town glimpsed, which they bitterly
repented having left.

Others, having strayed from their route on the side of the Occident, fell on a flourishing town, abounding in
population, in herds, in palms, and in diverse trees. One gave them hospitality there, one had them eat and
drink, and they passed the night in a mill where they got drunk and fell asleep; they awoke only in the ardor
of the sun, and they found themselves in a town ruined and deserted. All thinned out, they set out and marched
all the day until the evening: another town appeared to them, larger, more prosperous than the first, richer
in population, in trees, and in herds. They conversed with the inhabitants and recounted to them the history
of the first town; the inhabitants set about exclaiming and laughing at them, then they led them to a meal at
the home of one of the inhabitants of the town. They ate, drank, and passed thus the time until they were
drunk. The next day, on awakening, they found themselves in an immense town, without any inhabitant and
surrounded by palms whose fruits had fallen and piled up. They came out, the breath charged with the odor of
the drinks and the reek of the wines; all the day they marched, and in the evening, of a shepherd who pastured
his ewes, they asked their route, and on his indications, they marched during a part of the day of the next
day and arrived at the town of Ashmounein in the Said.

The towns of these peoples are the ancient towns of the interior of which the Genii have made themselves
masters. Among them, there are some that are veiled to the eyes and that no one can see. One says that in the
time of El Boudair ben Qaftarim ben Qobtim ben Beïsar ben Ham ben Nouh one raised, in the western desert,
towers and places of pleasure where this prince sent a crowd of people of his house who peopled the region and
multiplied to such a point that all the country was inhabited. They remained thus a long time. Then the
Berbers mingled with them by marriages. Later, there was misunderstanding; there were between them wars during
which these regions were ruined; the population disappeared, except some points that one calls the oases.

[PDF p. 728]

CHAPTER LXXII
OF THE TOWN OF SANTARIAH

The town of Santariah forms part of the Oases and was built by Minaqioush, the constructor of the town of
Akhmim, one of the ancient kings of the Copts. He had, says Ibn Ouacif Shah, the resolution and the firmness
of his father and was admired by the Egyptians. It was he who, the first, constructed riding-grounds (manèges)
and who ordered his companions to exercise themselves there. The first, he constructed a hospital for the
people stricken with acute and chronic afflictions: he provided it with remedies and with physicians whom he
paid largely, and placed there administrators. He established for himself a feast in which the people gathered
near him; he called it the "feast of the king": it took place on a certain day of the year; one ate and drank
for seven days, and the king watched, seated on a throne posed on columns, clothed in collars of gold and in
garments magnificent and brocaded with gold. Above the king rose a cupola plated in the interior with marble,
with glass, and with gold. It is in the time of this king that was built Santariah in the desert of the Oases.
He made it of white square stones; in each wall opened a gate from which set out a boulevard leading to the
opposite wall. Each boulevard to the right and to the left was provided with gates giving on streets leading
to the middle of the town. There extended a circus around which ran seven rows of tiers, surmounted by a
cupola of varnished wood reposing on magnificent columns of marble. In the middle of the circus rose a tower
of marble surmounted by a statue of black granite that turned at the same time as the sun. On all sides under
the cupola were suspended statuettes that whistled and spoke in different languages. The king took place on the
highest tier of the circus, having near him his sons, his relatives, and the princes; on the second tier sat
the chiefs of the priests and the viziers; on the third, the chiefs of the army; on the fourth, the
philosophers, the astronomers, the physicians, and the masters of science; on the fifth, the architects; on
the sixth, the chiefs of corporation, and on the seventh, the crowd. And each of the categories had for
instruction to

[PDF p. 729]

[OF THE TOWN OF SANTARIAH, continued]

look at those who were below it and not those who were above it, for never would it manage to equal them" --
and that is the best line of conduct. The wife of Minaqioush killed him with a blow of knife, and he died
after a reign of sixty years. Today Santariah is a very small country where dwell barely six hundred persons
originating from the cultivated lands: one calls them Syouah; their dialect is the Syouy which approaches that
of Zenata. One sees there orchards of palms, of fig-trees, of olive-trees, and other trees; the vines abound
there. There are there today nearly twenty springs that spread their sweet waters on the soil. From Santariah
to Alexandria, the distance is eleven days; it is fourteen from Santariah to Ghizeh-Misr. The inhabitants are
frequently stricken with the fever. The fruits of the country are excellent. The genii (djinns) afflict the
population of this village; whoever is isolated is carried off by them. One hears there distinctly the whistle
of the Djinns.

[PDF p. 730]

CHAPTER LXXIII
OF THE OASES OF THE EXTERIOR

They were constructed by one of the first kings of the Copts, named El Boudsir ben Qoftim ben Qobtim ben
Misraïm ben Beïsar ben Ham ben Nouh. "El Boudsir," says Ibn Ouacif Shah, "wished to go to the Occident, in
order to see what was found there; he fell on an immense territory furrowed with waters and with springs and
covered with herbage. He built there towers and houses of pleasure, and established there a great number of
people of his house who cultivated the region and built there so well that all the land of the Occident was
peopled. It remained thus a long time. Then came the Berbers who mingled with the inhabitants by marriages;
then burst forth the misunderstanding and the discord; wars came that ruined the country, and the population
disappeared, except on some points that one calls the Oases."

As for the countries of the Oases, says El Mas'oudi, they are situated between Masr, Alexandria, the Said of
Egypt, the Occident, and the land of the Ethiopians of Nubia, etc. There is found a land saturated with alum
and another saturated with vitriol, acid springs and others potable. The master of the Oases, in our epoch --
that is, in the year 332 [4 September 943 to 23 August 944] -- is Abd el Melek ben Merwan, of the tribe of the
Laouata, but of the Merwanite religious sect; he commands several thousand men who mount on horseback or on
camel. Between his country and that of the Ethiopians, there are about six days' march; it is also the
distance that separates it from all the inhabited places of which we have spoken. In his land are met things
particular and marvelous. This country subsists by itself, being linked to no other and having need of no
other. It produces dates, dried grapes (raisins), and jujubes.

The intendant of Abou-l Sherkh El Mo'ezz Hossam ed din 'Amr ben Mohammed ben Zenki El Shahrzouri recounted to
me having heard said, in the country of the Oases, that there was found there an orange-tree that produced in
a single

[PDF p. 731]

year fourteen thousand yellow fruits, without counting those that fell or remained green. But, added El
Shahrzouri, this seemed to me so extraordinary that I could not believe it, and I stayed in the country until
I had seen this tree: it was of the size of the greatest sycamore of Egypt, perhaps larger. I interrogated on
its subject the moustaufi (chief of the accounting) of the country, who, having had the registers of the
accounts brought, leafed through them and showed there the passage saying that, in such a year, such an
orange-tree had produced fourteen thousand ripe and yellow fruits, without counting what remained on the tree
of green ones and what had fallen from it, which was little.

At the Oases, the white alum is found in a valley that faces the town of Edfou. In the time of El Melek El
Kamel Mohammed ben El Adel Abou Bekr, and of his son El Saleh Negm el din Ayyoub, one brought each year from
the quarries of the Oases to Cairo a thousand qantars of white alum; in exchange, one exonerated the
inhabitants from the tax for the lands of the Oases; then this custom was less and less observed and ceased
completely.

In the year 339 [20 June 950 to 8 June 951], the king of Nubia advanced with a numerous army as far as the
Oases and fell unexpectedly on the inhabitants, of whom he killed and made prisoners a great number.

[PDF p. 732]

CHAPTER LXXIV
OF THE TOWN OF QOUS

Qous is the largest town of the Said; it is situated on the Nile. It was built after Qoft in the time of one
of the first Coptic kings named Sedan ben Adim ben El Boudsir ben Qaftarim; it took, it is said, its name from
Qous ben Qoft ben Akhmim ben Sifat ben Ashman ben Masr. Sedan ben Adim, reports Ibn Ouacif Shah, is the one
who built the pyramids of Dahchour with the stones cut in the time of his father. It is he who made the books
of the Nirandjâts (?) and the temple of Erment. He raised also a temple at Antinoé, a town of the interior;
he established his residence at Athrib and constructed a temple to the east of Alexandria. On the eastern bank
of the river, he founded towns. It is from his time that was built Qous, the elevated town, where was
installed a whole people of scholars and of artists. The Ethiopians and the Blacks having invaded the
country, he sent against them his son Minqaous at the head of a considerable army. He killed and took a
certain number of them and reduced to slavery those he had taken. This way of acting became for them a
traditional custom. He had opened the mines of gold of the country and charged his prisoners to work there and
to bring him the gold. He was the first who took a taste for the hunt, captured the animals of prey, and
obtained the race of the sloughi dogs by the crossing of wolves and domestic dogs. He executed talismans and
marvels of all sorts in incalculable number.

In his history of the Said, El Edfaoui says: Qous is neighbor to Qoft. A writer has recounted that Qous had
begun to prosper and that Qoft had begun to decline from the year 400 [25 August 1009 to 14 August 1010]. One
recounts that the Cadi of Qous, having gone to Assouan, four hundred cavaliers mounted on mules went to meet
him.

In the month of Ramadan of the year 662 [27 June to 26 July 1264] one brought to El Melek El Zahir Beïbars
small coins (fels) found at Qous where they were buried. One

[PDF p. 733]

examined one of them; on one face was the image of a king standing holding in the right hand a balance and in
the left a sword; on the other face a head with very long ears, the eye open; around the piece was an
inscription that a Greek monk read, and whose date on the day when it was deciphered went back two thousand
three hundred years. The sense of it was: "I, Ghaliath the king, I have the balance of justice and of
generosity in my right hand for those who obey, in my left hand the sword for the one who disobeys." On the
other face: "I, Ghaliath the king, my ear is open to hear the oppressed; my eye is open to watch over the good
state of my Empire." The scorpions and the great lizards abound at Qous; one meets there a species of scorpion
whose sting is mortal, to such a point that Qous is called "the pasture of the scorpions," for there is no
hope for whoever has been stung by a reptile. Once, on a summer day, there accumulated on the wall of the
mosque seventy great lizards in a single row. During the summer, if some inhabitant walks during the night
outside his house, he carries in one hand a lamp to light himself and in the other an iron spit to pierce the
scorpions.

From the year 800 [24 September 1397 to 12 September 1398] Qous has done nothing but decline; in 806 [21 July
1403 to 9 July 1404], at the epoch of the calamities and the scourges, there died at Qous seventeen thousand
persons. It was before so prosperous that at the epoch of the drought, in the year 776 [12 June 1374 to 1 June
1375], one had to abandon a hundred fifty parks, in the eastern part of the country. One calls there a "park"
a garden of twenty feddans at least, that possesses a saqiah with four channels of flow. And that without
counting a quantity of other gardens of a lesser extent that were also abandoned.

[PDF p. 734]

CHAPTER LXXV
OF THE TOWN OF ESNE

It is reported, says El Edfaoui, that one year this town produced forty thousand ardebs of dates, twelve
thousand ardebs of dried grapes (raisins). Esné is composed of about thirteen thousand houses; formerly, it is
said, there were there seventy boulevards.

[PDF p. 735]

CHAPTER LXXVI
OF THE TOWN OF EDFOU

The name of the town of Edfou is written sometimes with a d, sometimes with a t. El Edfaoui says: The perfect
preacher Abou Bekr, preacher of the town of Edfou, recounted to me that a palm projected three branches each
producing a single date; that he had pulled up this palm with the roots and had weighed it; the total weight
had risen to twenty-five dirhems, branches and trunk comprised; this tree was at Edfou. After the year 700 [16
September 1300 to 5 September 1301], brick-makers who were digging the soil brought to light a statue of stone
representing a woman seated on a throne and enveloped in a sort of net. On the back was a stele covered with
Greek writing. I saw it in this state in the town of Edfou.

[PDF p. 736]

CHAPTER LXXVII
OF THE TOWN OF AHNAS

It is one of the towns of the Said. One says that Jesus son of Mary was born there and that the palm of Mary
of which God speaks in this passage: "Shake the trunk of the palm, there will fall for you ripe dates" (Koran,
XIX, 25) continued to be seen there until the end of the dynasty of the Umayyads. But the general opinion is
that Jesus Christ was born at the borough of Bethlehem, a village depending on Jerusalem. At Ahnas, one finds
the Bang tree.

[PDF p. 737]

CHAPTER LXXVIII
OF THE TOWN OF EL BAHNASA

This town is situated to the west of the Nile; it is there that one fabricates the hangings named Bahnasyah,
that one weaves the stuffs with embroideries, the royal stuffs, the tents of great dimensions, and the robes
with white and black stripes. One fabricated there hangings of which a single piece measured thirty cubits
and of which the pair was worth two hundred methqals of gold. When one has fabricated there a curtain, a
carpet, or a robe of wool or of cotton, one always inscribes there the name of the one who is to receive the
object. It is a custom that has transmitted itself from age to age.

The Copts are in agreement to recognize that the Messiah and his mother Mary sojourned at Bahnasa, whence they
would have gone to Jerusalem.

According to a commentator of the Koran, in the passage relative to Jesus and to his mother: "We gave to them
both hospitality on a hill peaceful and abundant in springs" (Koran, XXIII, 52), the term of hill designates
Bahnasa. This town was built by a king of the Copts named Minaoush ben Minqâoush.

Here is what Ibn Ouacif Shah says of it: "Minaoush reigned in his turn and sought wisdom like his father. He
had its books brought to light, showed himself generous toward those who cultivate them, and filled them with
presents. He sought to attain the highest degree of perfection in the execution of marvelous objects; each of
their kings, moreover, had applied himself to make for himself things that none of his predecessors had made.
He affirmed himself in the knowledge of their books and had engraved on the stone their annals." Minaoush was
also the first, among the Egyptians, who adored the ox, here on what occasion: he had been stricken with a
sickness so grave that one despaired of him when, in a dream, he saw a gigantic genie who said to him: "You
will heal of your ill only if you consent to adore the ox; for the constellation that presided over your
horoscope is that of the bull with two horns." And Minaoush did what the genie asked; he had brought to him a

[PDF p. 738]

variegated bull of beautiful forms and had prepared for it in his palace a hall surmounted by a gilded cupola
and that one perfumed with incense. A special guardian was charged to keep himself near it, and to clean its
litter; and the king who came to adore it, unknown to his subjects, healed of his sickness. He was the first
who made use of chariots, and that during his sickness. These chariots were surmounted by houses with cupolas
of wood, and those of his servants and his women who desired it could do the same, and the ox dragged the
chariot from place to place and from one place of pleasure to another. When he arrived in an agreeable place,
the king stopped there, and each time he passed by some ruined place, he had it restored. One recounts that,
having seen that the bull that dragged his chariot was variegated and of an admirable form, he promised to
give it special cares and to make it walk before him, so much it pleased him; he had it covered with a
caparison of brocade. One day, finding himself in an isolated place, far from his slaves and his servants, he
approached the bull which remained standing; and behold, the animal spoke and said to him: "If the king
dispenses me from walking, puts me in a temple, and adores me, if he orders his subjects to adore me, I will
accomplish for him all he will exact; I will help him in his enterprises, I will render him strong in his
kingdom, and will set aside from him all calamity." The king, frightened, ordered that the bull be washed,
perfumed, placed in a temple, and that it be adored. Long was this bull thus adored. Marvelous thing! the
animal neither urinated nor dropped dung; it ate only the extremity of the green leaves of the reeds once a
month. It is this that confounded the spirit of the people. Such was the origin of the cult of the ox.
Menaoush constructed reduits where he buried treasures, and over which he raised stelae. In the desert of the
Occident, he built a town named Dîmas in which he raised a tower and buried around it the heroes. This town,
it is said, is still standing, and people who came from the Occident and had strayed have heard there the
whistle of the Djinns and have seen a brightness reflected there. In the [Egyptian] books one recounts that
this bull, which one adored since a long time, ordered them to execute its image in hollow gold, to gather
hairs of its head and of its tail and the powder of its horns and of its hoofs so that one might place them in
the statue; then it announced to them that it returned whence it had come, and prescribed them to place its
body in a sarcophagus of red stone and to bury it in the temple, raising its statue on the sarcophagus at the
moment when Saturn would be at its apogee and in opposition with the Sun in

[PDF p. 739]

[OF THE TOWN OF EL BAHNASA, continued]

the third quarter of the moon, while this star is in its greatest brilliance; one was to engrave again on the
statue the signs of the seven planets. One did thus, and the statue was adorned with all sorts of precious
stones, and in the place of the eyes, one put two enormous pearls. After having deposited it in the
sarcophagus, one planted a tree on its body in the temple; and one built a tower, eighty cubits high, that
during a week changed color each day to return every seven days to the first color. The temple was hung with
all sorts of hangings, and one brought a canal from the Nile to the temple. Around the sarcophagus one placed
talismanic statues with a monkey's head and a human body, each to set aside an evil and procure a good. At the
four gates of the temple were placed four idols, under each of which were buried all sorts of treasures; for
each statue one fixed offerings and incensings, and these statues were placed in the tree. The town was known
under the name of town of the Tree, and from this tree came all the species of trees. Minaoush is the first
who celebrated the Nourouz (New Year) in Egypt, and in his time was built Bahnasa. He raised there pillars
supporting a hall of yellow glass surmounted by a gilded cupola that, at the rising of the sun, sent back its
rays on the town. Minaoush reigned, it is said, over the Copts for 830 years, and was buried in one of the
small pyramids of the South, or, according to others, to the west of Ashmounein. With him were buried a great
quantity of silver, of precious stones, and of marvelous objects, the images (?) of the seven planets that
see the dead and the living (?), a thousand lamps of gold and of silver, ten thousand cups and vases of gold,
silver, and glass, and a thousand ingredients useful in all sorts of arts; and on his tomb one engraved his
name, the duration of his reign, and the epoch of his death.

In the year 734 [12 September 1333 to 31 August 1334], one discovered at Ashmouneïn, in a valley hollowed
between two mountains, square basins filled with a sweet and limpid water. People who followed their banks for
a whole day and a whole night could not reach the extremity of them. One says that these basins are the work
of Sourid, the constructor of the pyramids, who had made them to serve as a relief against the deluge of fire
that had been announced. Later, this valley was filled, because one feared that men might perish there.

[PDF p. 740]

The cheïkh, the imam Mohammed ben Ahmed El Ghariani says: "Ali ben Hassan ben Khaled El Sha'eri recounted to
me three times, without ever varying in his accounts, the following fact: A man of the tribe of the Fezarah
who dwell at Bahnasa said to me: I had set out with one of my friends, to visit the countries and earn our
living through the world; it was after the year 810 [8 June 1407 to 26 May 1408]; we had crossed the western
mountain on the side of Bahnasa, and we went at the grace of God. For days we marched thus, from the West to
the South, when we arrived all at once in a valley filled with trees, herbs, water, and fodder, but not a
human being. The valley was very extended in length and width: about a day (of march) in length and a day in
width; it was nothing but springs, plantations of palms and of olive-trees, and in great number, camels,
goats, jackals, and hyenas. The camels were there in the wild state, as well as the goats which, after having
been domesticated, had returned to the wild state. But in all the valley, one saw circulating no human being.
He told me then that they had stayed about two to three months in this place and had seen in the middle of the
valley a powerful town, fortified, with high walls and magnificent palaces; in approaching the walls, they had
heard a frightful noise and terrible and dreadful cries; they had seen a smoke rise into the sky and cover
little by little the town and all it contained. The wild camels, having approached the domestic camels they
rode, had attacked and killed them. The two Fezaris then had recourse to ruse; they plaited cords and made a
net of palm-fibers and seized these wild camels; then, having gathered stalks of palm, they fabricated baskets
of palm and panniers of reeds to put their provisions there. They filled them with dates and, making use of
the wild camels in the place of their tamed beasts, mounted them and took the direction of the Orient,
carrying with them a certain number of palm-stalks to mark out the road from the town, in order to be able to
return there. When they passed over a hillock, they planted there two of these stalks. They arrived finally at
the mountain that borders Egypt to the west. Arrived at Bahnasa, they recounted their adventures to their
fellow-citizens and set out again with their families. But, having reached the summit

[PDF p. 741]

of the western mountain, they found there, gathered in a single heap, all the palm-stalks they had planted on
the hillocks of the road. They had therefore to return, with their families and their companions, to Bahnasa.
That is what one recounted to me, but God is the most knowing."

[PDF p. 742]

CHAPTER LXXIX
OF THE TOWN OF ASHMOUNEIN

It was one of the greatest towns of the Said; it was, it is said, built by Ashmoun ben Masr ben Beïsar ben Ham
ben Nouh.

Ashmoun, says Ibn Ouacif Shah, was the most just of the children of his father, and the most desirous to
execute durable works capable of perpetuating his memory. It is he who constructed the halls plated with
colored glass in the middle of the Nile, and, according to the Copts, it is he who dug a subterranean passage
that led from Ashmouneïn to Antinoë passing under the Nile. According to what is reported, he dug it and
constructed it for his daughters who went thus to the temple of the sun. This subterranean passage was plated,
on the floor, the ground, and the ceiling, with thick and colored glass. Ashmoun, it is said, reigned longer
than his brothers: according to the historians, he reigned 800 years. After the 600th year of his reign, the
people of 'Ad took from him the kingdom which they kept 70 years, after which it withdrew through the Hedjaz
to El Dathimah and to the Ouadi-l Qora which it cultivated, and where it constructed dwellings and workshops.
It is then that God made the calamity fall on this people and destroyed it, and the government of Egypt
returned to Ashmoun. One recounts that this prince placed at the gate of Ashmouneïn a goose of copper that, if
some stranger came to enter into the town, pushed a cry while agitating its wings; thus one was warned of the
coming of the stranger, and one could, at will, send him away or let him enter. In his time, the serpents
having multiplied, one made the hunt of them and, of their flesh, one prepared medicines and remedies. Then,
with the aid of magic, one repelled them to the valley of the serpents in the mountains of Libya and of
Maraqiah where they remained imprisoned.

It is said, in the book of Orosius, that Ashmoun ben Qobt was the first king of the Egyptians and that he
lived in the time of Sharouh ben Raghou ben Falagh ben 'Aber ben Shalekh ben Arfakhshad ben Sam ben Nouh; that
the years of the world, until the time of Sharouh, were 2905, which carries back to 663 years after the
Flood.

[PDF p. 743]

There, the horses, the mules, and the asses were renowned for their agility, and one fabricated there red
hangings similar to the hangings of Armenia. A great number of clans of the Béni Ga'far ben Abou Taleb had
established themselves at Ashmouneïn; they were nomads and very powerful. With them were the Benou Mousallimah
ben 'Abd el Melek ben Merwan, their allies, and another tribe, the Benou 'Asker, whose father was, it is said,
a freedman of 'Abd el Melek ben Merwan. They descend, as one claims, from the Umayyads through the males.
There were still with them, as allies, the Benou Khaled ben Yezid ben Moawiah ben Abou Sofian, who had fixed
themselves in the land of Dalgah, near Ashmoun.

[PDF p. 744]

CHAPTER LXXX
OF THE TOWN OF AKHMIM

El Bakri orthographs it thus, of the form ifîl (whence: Ikhmîm). It is a town situated on the eastern bank of
the Nile, and that was built by Minaqioush, one of the first kings of the Copts.

This prince, reports Ibn Ouacif Shah, was patient and resolute. He began by applying himself to the
cultivations, built villages, raised stelae, gathered the works of science and the books left by the kings and
the sages; he fabricated marvelous objects and built himself a town where he withdrew. This town was
surrounded by a rampart on which were raised four stelae, one at each angle; between the stelae were placed
eighty statues of copper, holding in hand diverse arms and bearing on the chest an inscription mentioning his
virtues. There was at Memphis a man of the caste of the priests, one of the men most versed in magic, who
taught them to take the crocodiles and the wild beasts; he taught magic to the young people, and when these
had become skilled at it, he taught it to others. The king had a town constructed to install this priest
there, and this town is Akhmîm. Minaqioush reigned over the Egyptians a little more than forty years; then he
died and was buried in the pyramid situated facing El Atfih, and with him were buried considerable treasures,
precious stones, vases, and statues. On the tomb, one engraved the name of the king and the epoch of his
death. The people of Akhmîm recount that an individual, come from the Orient, had attached himself to the
temple; that he came each day to perfume it with incense and saffron, addressing above all his perfumes and
his incense to an image placed beside the door; and each day he found under this image a dinner that he took,
after which he went away. He had done this a number of times, but finally he was denounced by one of his
slaves to the governor of the country. One arrested him, but having given some money, he was able to leave the
country.

[PDF p. 745]

The temple of Akhmîm was one of the most admirable and most considerable. The Egyptians had constructed it to
store their wheat, for they had been warned in advance of the arrival of the Flood. But they were not in
agreement on its subject; according to some, it was to be a fire that would burn all that was found on the
surface of the earth; according to others, it would be an inundation. They constructed therefore this temple
before the Flood. One saw there the portraits of the kings who were to reign over Egypt. It was built of
blocks of marble, each measuring five cubits in width by two cubits in thickness. It comprised seven halls
covered with stones each eighteen cubits long and five wide; these stones were covered with paintings the
color of lapis and other shades, and for the one who saw them, these paintings seemed to have been executed
the very day, so perfect were they. Each of the halls bore the name of one of the seven planets, and on all
the walls were engraved images of forms and sizes different, accompanied by signs explaining the sciences of
the Copts -- the chemistry, the cosmography, the art of talismans, the medicine, the astronomy, the geometry,
etc., that these images represented.

Ibn Djoubeir recounts, in his voyage, that the length of this temple was six hundred twenty cubits and its
width a hundred seventy cubits; it reposed on forty columns, independently of the walls. Each column measured
fifty spans of circumference, and from one column to another, the space was thirty spans. Their capitals were
enormous. They were engraved from the base to the summit. From one capital to another went an enormous
flagstone of sculpted stone, fifty-six spans long, on a thickness of ten spans and a height of eight. The
ceiling, in flagstones of stone equally, seemed of a single piece, and one saw there, on the interior and the
exterior, extraordinary designs and marvelous colors, representing birds, men, and other objects. The wall of
the temple, eighteen spans wide, was of stones well cemented. Thus measured it Ibn Djoubeir in the year 578 [7
May 1182 to 25 April 1183]. One says that it is there that Dhou-l Noun (Jonas) learned the chemistry. This
temple remained standing until the year 780 [30 April 1378 to 18 April 1379]. A man of Akhmîm, the preacher
Gamal el din ben Bakr el Khatib 'Alam el din 'Ali, demolished it and drew from it much money: but his life was
short, and he died (a short time after). Since then, Akhmîm went declining and finished by being ruined. Many
recount that

[PDF p. 746]

the temple of Akhmîm was incarnated (?) in a beardless and naked young man. One day when people were hidden in
the temple, this young man had followed them and had struck them with redoubled blows, so that they came out
of it precipitately. One recounts the same fact regarding a man who had entered into the pyramids.

One recounted to me that an individual having stuck wax on one of the images of the temple of Akhmîm and having
left it in place, the scorpions flocked there, and that this wax having been put in a box, the scorpions
gathered around it. One recounts that there was in the temple of Akhmîm a demon that held itself standing on a
single leg and that had only one hand, which it held raised in the air; on its forehead and on its flanks were
engraved characters. It had a phallus very in evidence, adherent to the wall, and one claimed that whoever
would be adroit enough to cut the wall around this phallus and to withdraw it without breaking it would have
only to suspend it at his side to be constantly in erection as long as he had not withdrawn it; that he could
thus unite himself with her whom he loved and that he would not weaken as long as the stone phallus remained
suspended at his belt. One of the valis of Akhmîm having removed it experienced some of these marvelous
properties. The carpets of beast-skins came from Akhmîm, where one prepared them. One recounts that in this
town were gathered twelve thousand scholars versed in magic; it is there also that was met the bang tree. One
affirms that the one who built the temple of Akhmîm was named Doumaria and that he made it to serve as a model
to the peoples who would come after him. He retraced there the history of the peoples and the ages, the
exploits of which they are proud; he represented there the prophets and the sages, and engraved there the
names of the kings who were to reign until the end of times. At the moment of the construction of the temple,
the eagle was in the sign of the Ram (Aries), and, according to them, the eagle stays three thousand years in
each of the signs of the Zodiac. Now, today, the eagle is found at the end of the sign of Capricorn; there
would be therefore, according to this calculation, nearly thirty thousand years that this temple has been
constructed.

Abou 'Abdallah Mohammed ben 'Abd el Rahim el Qeïti, in his book "Gift to the Spirits," recounts that this
temple was of square form and constructed in cut stone; that it had four gates leading each to an edifice
provided equally with four dark gates leading to edifices whose disposition imitated that of the leaves of a
tree.

[PDF p. 747]

CHAPTER LXXXI
OF THE TOWN OF EL 'OQAB

The town of El 'Oqâb (in Arabic: the eagle), says Mas'oudi, is situated to the west of the pyramids of
Abousir, near Gizeh, at five days and five nights' march for a solid cavalier. The route of it has been filled
in, and the trace of the path that led there effaced. In this town are marvelous constructions, precious
stones, and riches.

Here is what Ibn Ouacif Shah recounts: El Oualid ben Douma the Amalecite had set out with a considerable army
traversing the regions and subduing the kings. Arrived in Syria, he sent one of his slaves, named 'Oun, who
directed himself toward Egypt and subdued it. Then El Oualid set out in his turn, rejoined 'Oun, who had gone
to meet him, and entered into Egypt of which he treated the inhabitants according to his good pleasure. Having
formed the project of going to the sources of the Nile, he set out with a numerous army, leaving the
government of Egypt to 'Oun, and remained forty years in his expedition. Now, 'Oun, after seven years of
government, became proud and had himself proclaimed king, refusing to recognize himself slave of El Oualid and
saying that he was his brother. Thanks to magic, he imposed himself, he carried off the free women, and
everyone attached himself to him. Every woman descending from the kings of Egypt, he married her; every
fortune, he seized it, having the proprietor die, and yet, he honored the priests and respected the temples.
One day, he saw in a dream El Oualid. The latter said to him: "Who permitted you to take the title of king?
You are not ignorant that it is a crime that merits death; you have united yourself with the daughters of the
kings and you have taken riches without having any right to them." Then he had a cauldron filled with oil
which was heated until boiling, and tore off his garments to throw him there. Then an eagle swooped on 'Oun,
seized him, carried him off into the airs, and deposited him at the edge of a precipice at the summit of a
mountain, whence he fell into a valley filled with a stinking mire. He awoke startled and recounted his vision
to the priests who said to him: "We will deliver you from El Oualid if you wish to fabricate an eagle and
adore it, for it is it that delivered you in your dream." "I

[PDF p. 748]

recognize it," answered 'Oun, "and the eagle said to me: Recognize this place and do not forget it." And he
made an eagle of gold, having two precious stones in the place of the eyes; he put on it a belt of precious
stones and made it a beautiful temple hung with silk. There one came to incense it and to make it offerings.
At the end, the eagle spoke. And 'Oun prostrated himself and adored it and invited his subjects to imitate
him, which they consented to do. On the orders of 'Oun all the workers of Egypt were gathered, and 'Oun led
all his partisans toward the western desert in search of a terrain vast and even where one could penetrate
only by difficult passages and abrupt mountains: pools of water spread in the vicinity. It is today the
Fayoum which was then only a marsh formed by the waters of the Nile and which remained thus until the moment
when Joseph brought the waters of the river to Medinet (el Fayoum). They set out therefore and remained a
month turning before finding the object of their desires. And there remained in Egypt neither worker, nor
engineer, nor whoever was skilled in construction, in the cutting of stones, or in sculpture: all went there.
He led there a thousand men of the army and seven hundred magicians to aid the constructors, and with them
tools and victuals on chariots, and the trace of these chariots is still visible in the desert of the Occident
as far as the Fayoum behind the Pyramids. When all the necessary stones were cut, one traced the enclosure of
the town, a square of two parasangs to the side; in the middle, one dug a well into which one descended the
image of a pig made of copper mixed with other materials, that one placed on a pedestal of copper, the face
turned toward the Orient, and that, at the moment of the rising of the house of Saturn, at the hour of its
apogee. One immolated a pig; with its blood one coated the face of the statue, one burned some of its hairs,
and one filled the interior with the blood, the hairs, the bones, the flesh, and the gall; a little gall was
put in the ears, and the rest of the pig was burned and the ashes deposited in a phial of copper before the
statue; one engraved there the virtues of Saturn. At the bottom of the well, one dug, in four directions, four
subterranean passages leading to the walls of the town, and at each extremity were made openings for the
circulation of the air; then the well was closed and surmounted by a cupola posed on columns raised on the
walls of the town. One traced boulevards, each boulevard ending at one of the gates of the town, which was
divided into streets and into houses. Around the cupola, one set statues of copper representing cavaliers
holding in hand javelins and the face turned toward the gates. The foundations

[PDF p. 749]

[OF THE TOWN OF EL 'OQAB, continued]

of the town were made of black stone, over it red stone, then yellow stone, green, and over the whole white
transparent stone, the whole cemented with lead poured into the joints. At the center of each stone was a rod
of iron, as in the construction of the pyramids. One made the rampart sixty cubits high and twenty wide. At
the summit of each of the gates of the rampart was a great eagle made of an alloy of copper, the wings
extended, and hollow. At each angle, a cavalier held in hand a javelin, the face turned toward the exit of the
town. The water, brought to the eastern gate, flowed across the town toward the western gate and poured itself
into cisterns; likewise from the South gate to the North gate. One sacrificed to the eagle the male eagles;
one brought the winds to the mouth of the statues that made heard shrill voices. 'Oun attached to each of them
a genie that was to prevent any individual, with the exception of the inhabitants, from entering into the
town. Then the eagle to which one rendered a cult was placed under the cupola in the middle of the town on a
pedestal with four angles; at each angle was the figure of a demon. The whole reposed on a column that turned;
the angle turned with it and remained in each direction (of the cardinal points) the quarter of the year.
Finally, all that achieved, 'Oun transported into this town the precious stones and the riches of Egypt, royal
objects, statues, works of sciences, silver powder, aromatics, arms. He installed there the great magicians,
the priests, the industrialists, the merchants, and divided among them the dwellings. The people of each trade
mingled only among themselves. He built a suburb for the artisans and the cultivators; on the canals, he put
bridges where passed those who penetrated into the town. The water flowed around the suburb. 'Oun raised
signals and established guards. Behind the town, on the side of the desert, he planted vines, palms, and all
sorts of trees, in distinct lots. Behind extended on all sides the cultivations of cereals. And all that was
created for fear of El Oualid.

Between this town and Memphis there were three days' march. One stayed there or went there, then returned to
Memphis. There were celebrated four feasts per year, at the four epochs when the eagle changed position.
Having admired all that, 'Oun felt his heart more reassured, until he received from Nubia a letter of El
Oualid prescribing him to bring him victuals and to prepare the markets. 'Oun sent him back by land and by
water what he asked and gathered in the town his partisans and those he had chosen from the daughters of the
kings

[PDF p. 750]

and of the great. El Oualid having approached, 'Oun went in his turn to the town, and fortified himself there,
having left a substitute at Memphis. El Oualid, advancing and having learned all that 'Oun had done, entered
into fury and thought of sending against him an army, but, better informed on the state of the town, on the
fortifications and the magicians that defended it, he wrote to 'Oun to come to him, menacing him with the
consequences that his disobedience could entail. 'Oun answered him: "On my part, there is no wounding word
against the king, no attack, no hostile act against his country: I am his servant and hold myself in this
place to repel any enemy coming from the West; and I cannot go to him because of the terror that he inspires
in me. Let the king therefore leave me where I am in quality of governor, and I will serve him all the taxes
and all the presents he will exact." And he sent him considerable treasures and precious stones. And El Oualid
renounced attacking him, and he remained in Egypt until his death.

[PDF p. 751]

CHAPTER LXXXII
OF THE TOWN OF EL FAYOUM

The emplacement of Fayoum was the outlet of the waters of the Nile; when the lord Joseph the Veridical took
the government of Egypt, he put it into cultivation.

Then, says Ibn Ouacif Shah, reigned El Rian ben El Oualid, who was the Pharaoh of Joseph; the Copts name him
Nahraoush. When he mounted on the throne, he was a prince of an admirable character, beautiful of visage, wise
and reflective, and who promised to be amiable. He discharged his people from the tax for three years and
divided the treasures among his particular friends and his subjects. He called to the government of the
country a man of his family named Atfeïn, the same that the traditionists name El Aziz. The king had raised
for him in the palace a throne of silver on which Atfeïn held himself and that he left only to go to the door
of the king. The latter remitted to his vizier the authority over the officers and the writers, and Nahraoush
occupied himself no more than with what passed behind the curtain (that is, outside the harem). Atfeïn
accumulating all his authority and relegating him to his pleasures, Nahraoush plunged himself into his
frivolity, neglecting the affairs, no longer showing himself to the people; but the country was prosperous and
the king asked no more. One constructed for him salons of colored glass, surrounded by water where the fish
lived freely, and of crystals of color where was produced, when the rays of the sun struck them, a marvelous
reflection. One constructed for him also pavilions of pleasure in number equal to that of the days of the
year, and each day he walked in one of them. Each pavilion was hung and furnished with furniture and hangings
different. However the rumor spread among the kings of the vicinity that Nahraoush occupied himself only with
pleasure and that the care of affairs reposed on Atfeïn. The king of the Amalecites, Abou Qabous 'Aqer ben
Yanhoum, marched on Egypt and directed himself toward its frontiers. El Aziz raised to resist him

[PDF p. 752]

an army whose general was named Barianis; he struggled for three years; but the Amalecite took the upper hand,
killed Barianis, razed the towers and the fortresses, and his yoke weighed on the country. The people then
went in crowds to the palace of the king and implored his protection. Nahraoush appeared, reviewed his army,
and with 600,000 combatants, without counting the valets, he set out on the march. The two armies met beyond
Houf and delivered a fierce combat. The Amalecite was defeated, and Nahraoush pursued him to the frontiers of
Syria, killed him a great number of men, destroyed the harvests and the trees, burned, hanged, and raised at
the places where he had arrived stelae on which he engraved these words: "He who passes beyond this limit, I
await him." He reached, it is said, Mossoul, struck Syria with a tribute, built near El 'Arich a magnificent
town, left a garrison, and returned to Egypt, where, having gathered an army from all the provinces, he
prepared to attack the king of the Occident. He set out therefore with 700,000 men, crossed the country of the
Berbers of which he subjugated the greatest part, and had depart from Raqodah, on a fleet, a general who was
to go to the islands of the children of Iafeth (Japheth) and devastate them. As for him, following the route
of land, he took the direction of the country of the Berbers, delivered them battle, and, by treaty, imposed
on them the tribute; from there he pursued his route on Ifriqiah and Carthage (?), concluded peace with these
countries by means of tribute and, continuing his route, reached the place where the green river throws itself
into the sea of Roum; it is there that are raised the statues of copper. He raised there in his turn a statue
on which he engraved his name and the account of his campaign, and imposed a tribute on the inhabitants of the
region. Then, making an elbow on the great land, he reached Spain whose king combated him for long days, then
treated, by means of tribute and a promise to defend Egypt against the aggression of the neighbors. After
that, he set out, but not by sea, and directed himself toward the Orient across the country of the Berbers.
All the peoples he met had to submit to him. From there, he marched toward the South, combated a number of
peoples, and sent a general to a town situated on the Black Sea. The king of this town came out to meet the
general who taught him what El Raïan was and the fashion in which he treated the kings. "Never has anyone,"
said the king, "spoken to us of that." The general then posed him some questions on the subject of the sea.
"Has no one ever navigated it?" he asked. "That is impossible for whoever it may be," answered the king,
"because of the shadow that the clouds project there and that prevents seeing."

[PDF p. 753]

El Raïan having arrived, one brought him presents -- fruits, bananas for the most part, and a black stone
that, put in the water, became white. The king, directing himself toward the countries of the Soudan, arrived
at the kingdom of the anthropophagous (cannibal) Damdams who went to meet him entirely naked. He vanquished
them, subjugated them, and took the route of the Obscure sea; but, as fogs rose from it, he returned toward
the North and arrived near a statue of red stone that, with the hand, made a sign to turn back and that bore
this inscription on the chest: "There is nothing behind me." From there he marched toward the town of Copper,
but could not reach it; he found the Tenebrous valley where one heard great noises without seeing anyone,
because of the thickness of the shadows. He went from there to the valley of the Sands and, on his route, met
statues bearing names of kings. He raised near them another statue on which he engraved his name. Having taken
knowledge of the desert, he crossed it to ruins that extend along the Obscure sea, and where he saw lions that
roared one against the other. Judging that beyond there was for him no ruin, he came back on his steps,
regained the valley of the Sands, and crossed the land of the Scorpions where he lost some of his men; the
rest of the army preserved itself from harm thanks to conjurations. Having crossed this region, he arrived at
the town of the Sages, more known under the name of town of Kand, whose inhabitants fled before him to the
mountain. He remained there a long time and his army was on the point of dying there of thirst. At the end,
from the mountain descended one of the most virtuous and of the sages, whose body was all covered with hairs:
"What do you want," he said to the king, "O stranger, too happy and too favored, why lose yourself and your
army? Does what you possess not suffice you, and have you not confidence in your Creator? Seek the repose,
abandon the fatigues and the error, for that is all you can acquire thus." The king, surprised at these words,
asked him for water. The other having indicated some to him, the king interrogated him on his country. "Our
country," he answered, "no one before you has reached it." "Of what do you live?" "Of the roots of the plants;
that suffices us, for we content ourselves with little." "And what do you drink?" "The rain and the snow."
"Why have you fled at our approach?" "We have little desire to frequent you, but we had no subject to fear
you." "What do you do when the sun becomes burning?" "We withdraw into grottoes hollowed in the mountain."
"Have you need of money? I will leave you some."

[PDF p. 754]

[OF THE TOWN OF EL FAYOUM, continued]

"Only the civilized (policed) people have need of money; we would not know what to do with it. We content
ourselves with what suffices us; moreover, we have so much that, if you saw it, you would despise your
riches." "Show it to me," said the king. The man then led the king and some men of his suite toward a land
situated at the foot of the mountain; there were found there ingots of gold in quantity. Their guide showed
them also a valley whose two banks were sown with emeralds and with sapphires. Nahraoush ordered his
companions to take some of the largest of these stones, which they did. The sage, seeing that the suite of the
king adored a statue that one transported in the expedition, invited the king not to sojourn longer on their
land and inspired in him some fear on the subject of the adoration of the idols. Nahraoush, having taken
leave, set out, and among all the peoples he met, he left traces of his passage. He arrived finally in Nubia,
imposed by treaty the tribute on this country, and raised at Dongola a statue on which he engraved his name
and the account of his expedition. Then he took the route of Memphis; and in each town of Egypt, the
inhabitants, filled with joy and gladness, came to meet him carrying flowers and perfumes. Finally he arrived
at Memphis; the people of the town, led by El 'Aziz, came to meet him laden with flowers and perfumes of all
sorts. El 'Aziz had had prepared for him a pavilion of colored glass, adorned with the richest hangings.
Around were planted trees and flowers, and one had dug a basin filled with blue glass in the thickness of
which were seen images of fish in white glass. The king descended in this pavilion, and the people stayed days
and days drinking and eating. Then Nahraoush reviewed his army and ascertained that he had lost 70,000 of his
men; on the other hand, he brought back more than 50,000 prisoners. His expedition, outside Egypt, had lasted
eleven years.

The kings, informed of his return, were full of respect for him, and his power affirmed itself. He
constructed, on the eastern bank, palaces of marble surmounted by towers. He gave orders for the amelioration
of the country, had the dikes repaired and the soil cultivated, so well that the yield of the tax rose to a
hundred million dinars.

It is in his time that entered into Egypt a young man of Syria whom his brothers had sold by ruse. The
caravans stopped then at the place that one calls today El Maouqef (the halt). The young man was brought there
and was put up for auction. It was Joseph the Veridical, the son of Jacob, son of Abraham the cherished of
God.

[PDF p. 755]

Atfeïn bought him to make a present of him to the king. But when he arrived with him at his palace, his wife
Zuleikha, who was at the same time his cousin, having seen the new slave, said to her husband: "Let us keep
him, we will raise him, and he will serve us." And there happened to him what God recounts in the Koran. She
dissimulated her love until the day when she was vanquished by it. Then, having withdrawn aside with Joseph,
she adorned herself for him and avowed to him that she loved him, adding that if he consented to satisfy her
desires, she would fill him with riches. But, as he refused, she promised herself to make him yield. She set
about praying him, and he, always resisted, until at the end her husband appeared. On seeing him, Joseph drew
away from Zuleikha. Now, El 'Aziz was impotent and could not approach women. And as Joseph attempted to excuse
himself to El 'Aziz: "I was asleep," said Zuleikha, "when this one came to abuse me." But some of her people
appeared and testified against his wife. "Leave that," said Atfeïn to Joseph -- that is, "leave the excuses" --
and addressing himself to his wife: "Ask me pardon for your sin," he said. The rumor of the adventure reached
Nahraoush, but he had returned to his pleasures and lived apart from men. The women of high society, put au
courant of the story, mocked Zuleikha; she invited some of them to a collation and had prepared two gilded
halls that one hung with brocade, golden yellow. Between the two halls she had hung curtains of brocade, and
she ordered the hairdressers to adorn Joseph and to make him come out by the hall that faced the one where she
would be with the women. This hall faced the sun. The hairdressers took therefore Joseph with them, and
adorned his hair with all sorts of precious stones; they clothed him in a robe of yellow brocade brocaded with
red disks incrusted with gold where one saw little green birds; the robe was lined with green. Under the robe,
Joseph wore a red tunic, and on his head was placed a crown of pearls and of precious stones. The hairdressers
made pass under the crown the extremity of the hairs that fell thus on the forehead, they brought the curls
onto his chest, uncovered the forehead, and placed there the crown. At his ears, they put two earrings of
precious stones; behind the collar of his caftan, they let hang between his shoulders his hairs intermingled
with precious stones and gold; at his neck one suspended a collar of gold incrusted with red stones and
splendid pearls. At his waist was attached a belt of gold with clasps of colored stones and with chiseled
pendants.

[PDF p. 756]

One shod him with white shoes with green embroideries on a ground of gold; and the bottom of his caftan was
bordered with braids and galloons, and one sewed there a number of green stones. On each cheek one made curl a
lock of hair, one enlivened his eyes with kohl, and one put in his hand a fan of green feathers. The women
having finished eating and drinking, Zuleikha remitted to them knives with handles of precious stones to cut
the fruits; these fruits were, it is said, oranges, and while her guests peeled them, Zuleikha said to them:
"One has reported to me that you spoke of me and of my slave." "How," they cried, "can one have told you that?
you are of a race too elevated for such a thing to exist; a person of your quality is placed higher than the
very sons of the kings by her beauty and her nobility. How could you have contented yourself with your slave?"
"One has not told you the truth," replied Zuleikha, "and he is at my home for another service." Then she made
a sign to the hairdressers, these lifted the curtain that separated the hall where they held themselves from
the other, and Joseph appeared lit by the sun full in the face; and the hall and all it contained was lit by
the face of Joseph. The latter advanced, the fan in hand, and the women looked at him furtively. Arrived near
Zuleikha, Joseph stopped and with his fan kept away the flies from the head of his mistress. The women, all
occupied in looking at him, and marveled at his beauty, cut their fingers believing they cut their fruits, and
pronounced not a word. "What have you then?" Zuleikha asked them, "you no longer speak and you look at my
slave." "God forbid!" they answered; "that one is not your slave; it is a magnificent angel." And there was
among them none who was not seized with desires and did not burn with love for him. "It is that one," said
Zuleikha, "for which one makes me so many reproaches." "No one," answered the women, "can address you the least
blame on his subject. Whoever would blame you would be wrong. Take him then." "I have tried," said Zuleikha,
"but he refused me. Speak to him for me." Then each set about speaking to Joseph, trying in secret to convince
him for her own account and offering herself to him, but he, always refused. Hoping to have themselves
accepted, they spoke for Zuleikha and said to him: "Your mistress loves you and you hate her. You have not the
right to disobey her." "It matters little to me," said Joseph. Finally, judging all persuasion useless, they
attempted to take him by force. "No," said Zuleikha, "that would not be suitable; but since he refuses me, I
will put him aside from all pleasure; I will have him

[PDF p. 757]

imprisoned and will withdraw from him all I have given him." Joseph answered: "The prison is preferable to
what one exacts of me." And she swore by her god, which was a statue of green emerald named Atared (Mercury),
that if he persisted, she would put her menace into execution on the spot. And she had him stripped of his
garments, had him clothed in coarse cloth, and asked El 'Aziz to put his prison at her disposal in order to
make cease the calumnious rumors that circulated about her. El 'Aziz consented, and Joseph was thrown into
prison. The king saw in a dream someone who said to him: "Such and such have formed the project of killing
you." And he designated the officer of the mouth (chief cook) and the cup-bearer of the king. On his
awakening, the king had them come, interrogated them, and they avowed. According to certain authors, only one
of them avowed and the other denied energetically. The king had them imprisoned. The officer of the mouth was
named Rasan and the cup-bearer Mortos. Joseph was equally in the same prison, consoling those who were there
and promising them liberty. The two officers recounted to him their dreams, as God reports in his book, and
the event was accomplished as Joseph had announced. Later, the king had the vision of the cows and that of the
ears (of grain); it is then that the cup-bearer spoke to him of Joseph, went to the captive, recounted to him
the dreams of the king, and returned to the prince who cried: "Let him come!" "I will not come out," said
Joseph, "before one has cleared up the affair of the women for which I was imprisoned." All was discovered
then, and Zuleikha made complete avowals. One sent therefore to seek Joseph, one washed him, one rid him of
the impurities of the prison, and one had him clothe the garments that suit those who present themselves
before the kings. On seeing him, the king felt his heart fill with affection for him; he filled him with
favors and interrogated him on his dreams, which Joseph explained, as God has recounted. "Who will come to my
aid?" asked the king. "I," answered Joseph. And the king gave him a royal garment, put on his head a crown,
and had him paraded through the town, escorted by the army, and brought back to the palace where the king had
him sit on the throne of El 'Aziz, of whom he took at the same time the functions of regent. One reports that
after the death of El 'Aziz, the king gave his widow in marriage to Joseph. "This is better than what you
wished of me," Joseph said to her. "Pardon me," answered Zuleikha; "my husband was impotent, and no woman can
see you without her heart being filled with love for you because of your beauty." The years of abundance
having come in Egypt, Joseph gathered from all sides the grains, stored them, and gathered a

[PDF p. 758]

great quantity. And when came the years of famine, when the Nile began to decrease and its level lowered from
year to year, the country was desolated to such a point that the wheat sold for fortunes, jewels, livestock,
garments, dishes (of price), lands. One would have abandoned Egypt, if Joseph had not been at the head of
affairs. Syria too was desolated by the scourge, and the brothers of Joseph came to Egypt as God has reported.
Joseph sent to seek his father who transported himself to Egypt with all his family. Joseph, carrying with him
wheat of Egypt, went to meet him and presented him to the king. Jacob was then a venerable old man whom the
king treated with respect. He interrogated him on his age, his state, and his religion. "I am a hundred twenty
years old," answered Jacob; "for my state, I possess sheep that I pasture and of which I make use. I adore the
master of the world, your creator and mine. He is the God of my fathers, your God, and the God of all things."
Among the people of the suite of the king was a priest, very powerful, who said to the king: "I fear that the
ruin of Egypt may come by the hand of the children of this man." "How to assure ourselves of it?" asked the
king. Then the priest said to Jacob: "Show me your God, O old man." "My God," said Jacob, "is too great for one
to see him." "We others, we see our gods." "Certainly," said Jacob, "your gods are of gold, of silver, of
stone, of precious stones, of copper, and of wood put into work by the sons of Adam who are the slaves of my
God. There is no God but him, he is the sublime and the wise." "A thing that one cannot see with the eyes does
not exist," replied the priest. Jacob, irritated, gave him a contradiction: "God," he said, "is not a thing
like the other things; he is the creator of all that exists; there is no God but him." "Describe him to us,"
asked the priest. "The creatures alone," said Jacob, "can be described; but he, he is the Unique creator, the
Ancient, the Wise, the Eternal; he sees, but one does not see him." And Jacob rose in anger. The king had him
sit down again and ordered the priest to be silent. "We have found in the books," said again the priest to the
king, "that the ruin of Egypt will come by the hand of these people." "Will it be accomplished in our time?"
asked the king. "No," said the priest, "nor for a long time yet. But the best would be to have him die and to
leave subsisting no one of his race." "Even though," replied the king, "the thing were such as you say, it is
not possible for us to prevent it, and we cannot make these people die." And he gave as a place of sojourn to
Jacob and to his companions the valley of El Sedir, where Jacob remained

[PDF p. 759]

[OF THE TOWN OF EL FAYOUM, continued]

until his last day. At his death, one transported him to the village of Abraham, and one buried him near him.
Nahraoush, it is said, was a believer, but he dissimulated his faith, fearing that his authority might suffer
from it. He reigned 120 years, and, under his reign, Joseph created the Fayoum. The Egyptians had spoken ill
of him to the king: "He has become old," they said, "his intelligence darkens; put it to the test." And the
king said to Joseph: "I have given this region to my daughter; it is only an outlet for the waters; put it in
state for her." And Joseph set to work; he managed to make the waters disappear, had the muds removed, dug the
Menha, and built Allahoun; he divided the waters and distributed them; and all that in four months. Everyone
was astonished at his ability.

He was, it is said, the first who, in Egypt, practiced the art of the engineer. At the death of Nahraoush, his
son Darmagoush succeeded him. It is the same who bears among the historians the name of Darem ben El-Rian; it
is the fourth Pharaoh of the Egyptians. This prince followed a line of conduct quite different from that his
father had followed. Joseph was his lieutenant, but if, in certain affairs, he adopted his opinions, in
certain others, he took no account of them. It is in his time that Joseph died; one buried him and deposited
his body in a sarcophagus of marble that one buried on the western bank of the Nile; and this bank became more
and more fertile, while the eastern bank remained sterile. The sarcophagus was then transported to the
Orient, and this region became fertile in its turn, while the fertility of the western bank decreased. One
decided therefore to place the body one year on the eastern bank and one year on the western bank. Then one
resolved to attach the sarcophagus in the middle of the river by means of solid chains, and the two banks of
the river became fertile both.

Then, says Ibn el Hakam, reigned El Raisan ben El Oualid ben Douma; it is he who was the sovereign of the
prophet Joseph. Joseph having explained the dreams the king had had, the latter sent to seek him and had him
come out of prison. On arriving near Joseph, recounts Ibn 'Abbas, the messenger said to him: "Throw far from
you the garments of the prisoner, clothe yourself in new garments, rise, and go to the king." And the other
prisoners invoked God in favor of Joseph. He was then thirty years old, and when he was in the presence of the
king, the latter, surprised at his youth, cried: "How could this young man explain dreams that neither the
magicians nor the priests could understand!" However he had him sit near him. "Fear nothing,"

[PDF p. 760]

he said to him, and when he had conversed with him, Joseph grew in his eyes. He transmitted to him his
authority, remitted to him his seal, and charged him with all that passed behind his door (that is, all public
affairs, as opposed to the private affairs that pass inside the palace). He made him a gift of a collar of
gold, of garments of silk, of a horse harnessed and adorned like the mount of the king himself, and had
proclaimed at the sound of the drum through all Egypt that Joseph was the lieutenant of the king.

According to 'Akramah, Pharaoh said to Joseph: "I have given you the empire, but I desire that my throne be
four fingers higher than yours." "Good," said Joseph. And the king, having had him sit on the throne,
withdrew into his apartments with his women and remitted to Joseph the direction of all the affairs of Egypt.
Thus, for having explained the dream of the king, Joseph reigned over Egypt.

Here is what El Leith ben S'ad reports: Old men of our country reported to me the following tradition: The
dearth was so great in Egypt that the inhabitants bought what to eat with gold; the gold exhausted, they paid
with silver; the silver exhausted in its turn, they paid with sheep, and the sheep too were exhausted. And
Joseph continued to sell victuals until there remained to the Egyptians neither silver, nor gold, nor ewes,
nor oxen, which happened in the first two years. The following year, the third, they came to find Joseph:
"There remains to us no more," they said to him, "than ourselves, our families, and our lands." And Joseph
bought all their lands for Pharaoh, then he gave them grains to sow these lands, on condition that the fifth
of the harvest belong to the king.

Regarding the foundation of the town of El Fayoum by Joseph, one recounts that, after having been for thirty
years the vizier of Pharaoh, Joseph was destituted. "Why have you deposed me?" asked Joseph. "I do not depose
you by discontent," answered him the king, "and I do not forget your blessed influence; but my fathers
recommended me not to keep a vizier more than thirty years, and I would fear (that in staying longer) the
vizier might take root and end by prevailing over the king." "I have been for you," replied Joseph, "a
faithful counselor who has made you possessor of all the country of Egypt; give me in your turn a land that
will serve as a residence for me, my family, and my descendants." "Choose the land you wish," said Pharaoh to
him. And Joseph walked in the desert and arrived at the land of Fayoum. There was a mountain;

[PDF p. 761]

the plain extended from this mountain to the river, and after having examined the state of the waters of the
river, he recognized that the Nile would come to cover all the region. He pierced the mountain and made the
water pass there, which spread through the Fayoum, watering the soil; on the two banks of the water he raised
three hundred sixty villages, according to the number of the days of the year, filled them with the grains and
the harvests that he gathered. And when the Nile diminished and the dearth fell on Egypt, he sold each day
what a village of the Fayoum contained, so well that he was in his turn proprietor of all Egypt, as he had
before made the king master of it. The fortune of Joseph became immense, his riches accumulated, and, a short
time after, the king made him again vizier, a function he exercised until his death. By his testament, he
recommended to transport his body toward the Holy Land, and Haroun, son of Ephraïm, son of Joseph, led it away
with an escort of ten thousand Israelites. But the great of Egypt opposed his departure and vanquished him in
the desert that is between Egypt and Syria. The greatest part of his companions having perished, Haroun had to
return with the others to Egypt where they remained until the moment when God sent Moses, son of Amran, as
messenger to Pharaoh. Moses, having made the Israelites come out of Egypt, led away with him the body of
Joseph; at this epoch, the Fayoum was in full prosperity. The cause of the putting into cultivation of the
Fayoum, according to another version, was the following: Joseph governed in Egypt and enjoyed with Pharaoh a
magnificent situation; he was then a hundred years old, and the viziers of the king came to declare to their
master that the intelligence of Joseph was weakening, that his spirit was darkening, and that his wisdom was
diminishing. Pharaoh received them very badly, contradicted their assertions, and maltreated them. They were
silent for two years, then returned to the charge and held the same discourse. "Imagine something that may
permit me to put him to the test," said Pharaoh. The Fayoum was named then El Goubah (the pit) and served as
an outlet for the overflow and the excess of the waters of the Said. The viziers agreed to decide that it
would be the point that would serve as a test for Joseph. They said therefore to Pharaoh: "Ask Joseph to
exhaust the water of El Goubah and to rid it of it, thus you will add a domain to your domains and revenues to
your revenues." The pharaoh summoned Joseph and said to him: "You know how much I love my daughter such-and-
such; I have resolved, at her majority, to seek her a land, and I have found nothing better for her than El
Goubah. It is indeed a country

[PDF p. 762]

at once distant and near that one can perceive, in whatever direction it may be, only by a defile or by the
desert; likewise one can go there from Egypt only by a defile or by the desert. The Fayoum is the center of
Egypt as Egypt is the center of the other countries, for one can approach Egypt only by a defile or by the
desert. I have made a gift of this land to my daughter, therefore neglect neither means nor study for the
success of it." "Good," said Joseph. "When you wish it, send to seek me, and, if it please God, I will
accomplish what you ask." "It is what I desire most ardently," said the king, "and the thing is quite
pressing." And he recommended to Joseph to dig three canals, one leading from the south to the Said at such or
such place; another to the Orient, going from such to such point, and a third to the Occident from such place
to such other. Joseph put the workers to work and dug El Manha which sets out from the Nile, a little to the
south of Ashmoun, and goes to Al Lahoun; order was given to the masons to dig Al Lahoun; he dug the canal of
the Fayoum which is the eastern canal, and another canal passing at Benhamat, one of the villages of the
western Fayoum; the water coming out by the eastern canal poured itself into the Nile, that which came out by
the western canal poured itself into the desert of Benhamat, toward the West: there remained no more water in
El Goubah. He then made the workers enter there: one tore up the reeds and the aquatic plants that were there,
one carried them outside. The water of the Nile then for the first time became running, and the lands of El
Goubah excellent for cultivation; the water of the Nile, rising, entered by the water-intake of El Manha, ran
in the canal until it arrived at Al Lahoun which it crossed to the Fayoum whose canal it filled, and which it
watered, making of the region a lake of the Nile. The king went there with his viziers. The work had lasted
only seventy days. At the sight of the result, the king said to his viziers: "It is there the work of a
thousand days (elf youm)." And the region took the name of El Fayoum. One cultivated it in the same fashion as
the plains of Egypt.

I have heard recounted in another fashion the creation of Fayoum. When Joseph took the government of Egypt, he
was aged thirty years; he remained forty years at the head of affairs, and the Egyptians murmured: "There he
is become old, his wisdom diminishes," and they deposed him: "Choose yourself," they said to him, "among the
fallow lands a domain that you will take for yourself and that you will arrange as you understand it. If we
ascertain that you are still

[PDF p. 763]

skilled and wise, we will be convinced that you are in the force of intelligence, and we will give you back
the power." Joseph therefore traversed the desert of Egypt and chose the emplacement of the Fayoum which was
conceded to him. He dug there the canal of El Manha which set out from the Nile and brought the waters of it
into the Fayoum, and the work was achieved in a year.

One recounted to me, says Yezid ben Abou Nabib, that Joseph had accomplished this work by divine inspiration,
and that he had been powerfully aided by the multitude of the workers and the laborers. When one saw the
result of this work, one recognized that the work accomplished at the Fayoum by Joseph had not its equal in
all Egypt. The people were of the opinion that never had Joseph shown more prudence, ability, and wisdom, and
one gave him back the power that he exercised still for sixty years, in all for a hundred years, until he died
at the age of 130 years. Joseph, having been informed of the conversations that had taken place between the
viziers and the king, and knowing that all that had been accomplished had been only a test, said to the king:
"I have other projects and other plans than all you have seen." "What are they?" said the king. "I will give
as inhabitants to the Fayoum a family drawn from each of the villages of Egypt, and each family will build
itself a village; in this way, the number of the villages of the Fayoum will be equal to that of the villages
of Egypt. And when these villages are built, I will distribute to each of them the quantity of water
necessary, neither more nor less. I will give water to each village only when the Nile no longer reaches it.
For the elevated terrains, I will make the water rise from below and will make it descend from above for the
depressed terrains, and that at every instant of the day and of the night; each village will receive a
quantity of water wisely measured, without ever having less than what will be necessary to it nor more than
what it will need." "That," said Pharaoh, "will be similar to the celestial kingdom." "Yes, certainly," said
Joseph. And having set to work, he ordered the construction of the villages of which he himself fixed the
limits. The first village that was built at the Fayoum was the village of Sanah; it is there that resided the
daughter of Pharaoh. Then, according to his orders, one dug the canal and one built bridges, and when the
whole was achieved, the land was measured as well as the water. It is since this time that the art of the
engineer exists; no one before knew it. Joseph was also the first who measured the flood of the Nile and who
constructed a nilometer at Memphis.

The author says: "The Bible reports that Pharaoh constrained the Israelites

[PDF p. 764]

[OF THE TOWN OF EL FAYOUM, continued]

to build and to make bricks; they built him a quantity of towns, such as among others Fithom and 'Aramsîs. A
commentator claims that by these two towns one must understand the Fayoum and the Houf-Ramsis. In the time of
El Raisan ben El Oualid, Jacob and his children entered into Egypt; they were then in all seventy-three
persons, men and women, and Joseph gave them for sojourn the territory comprised between Aïn Shams and Farma,
a fertile and prosperous land. In approaching Egypt, Jacob sent Juda to Joseph. The latter went to meet him,
clasped him on his chest, and wept. And when Jacob was brought into the presence of Pharaoh, the king
addressed the word to him. Jacob was then a venerable old man, beautiful of visage, with a magnificent beard,
with a powerful voice. "O old man," Pharaoh said to him, "what age are you?" "120 years," said Jacob. Now,
Bahman, magician of Pharaoh, had given in his book the description of Jacob, of Joseph, and of Moses: he knew
that the loss and the destruction of Egypt would come by their hands. Thus he left berabi (temple) texts and
images of those who were to be the cause of the destruction of Egypt. When he saw Jacob, he rose in the
council, and the first question he posed him was this one: "Whom do you adore, O old man?" "I adore God,"
answered Jacob, "the God of all things." "And how do you adore what you do not see?" "God is too great and too
powerful for one to see him." "We others, we see our gods," said Bahman. "Your gods," answered Jacob, "are
made by the sons of Adam who die and dissolve; but my God is higher and greater, and he is nearer to man than
his jugular vein." Then Bahman, turning toward Pharaoh: "Here," he said to him, "is the one by whose hand must
come the loss of our country." "Will that take place in our time," asked Pharaoh, "or in another than ours?"
"Neither in your time, nor in the time of your sons," said Bahman. "Have you found that in the decrees of your
God?" "Yes." "And how could you kill the one whom his God wishes to make the instrument of the ruin of his
people? It is not fitting to speak thus."

According to Ka'b, Jacob lived in Egypt sixteen years and, when death approached,

[PDF p. 765]

he said to Joseph: "Do not bury me in Egypt, but when I am dead, carry off my body and bury it in the grotto
of Hebron. Hebron is the oratory of Abraham and is situated eighteen miles from Jerusalem." When Jacob was
dead, one embalmed him with aloes and myrrh, and one deposited his body in a coffin of plane-wood. It took for
this forty days. Then Joseph spoke to Pharaoh and informed him of the death of his father and of the desire he
had expressed to be inhumed in the land of Canaan. The king authorized the translation of the body; the
cortège was accompanied by the great of Egypt, who, after having attended the inhumation, returned to their
country. One knows however that Jacob was first buried in Egypt and that it is only at the end of three years
that he was carried to Jerusalem, as he had recommended in dying. El Raisan ben El Oualid died next and was
replaced on the throne by his son Darem ben El Raisan; it is under the reign of this last that Joseph died.
"One day," said this patriarch on his deathbed, "one day you will come out of Egypt to return to the country
of your fathers. Take with you my bones." When he was dead, one deposited his body in a sarcophagus that one
buried on one of the banks of the river; and this bank became fertile, while the opposite bank became sterile.
The body was therefore transported to the other bank which became fertile in its turn while the first became
sterile again. Seeing this, one gathered the bones of Joseph which one put in a coffer of iron provided with a
chain. One raised on the bank of the river a column at the base of which one fixed a wedge of iron; to this
wedge one adjusted the chain, and the coffer was thrown into the middle of the Nile. And the banks of the
river became fertile both.

Here is on what occasion the bones of Joseph were transported from Egypt to Syria: Sarah, daughter of Aser,
son of Jacob, had lived to a certain old age and had lost her sight when Moses came out of Egypt with the
Israelites. They were enveloped in a cloud that interposed itself between them and the road which he no longer
saw. And a voice made itself heard that said to Moses: "You will not pass unless you have with you the bones of
Joseph." "Who knows where these bones are?" asked Moses. And one said to him: "An old blind woman whom we have
left in Egypt." Moses returned on his steps, and Sarah, having heard his approach, asked: "Why do you return?"
"I have received the order," said Moses, "to lead away the bones of Joseph." "You cannot," replied the old
woman, "if I am not with you." "Indicate to me where are the bones of Joseph," replied Moses.

[PDF p. 766]

Sarah indicated them to him, and Moses carried off the bones of Joseph with him into the desert of Tih.

Joseph, son of Jacob, son of Isaac, son of Abraham the cherished of God, is one of the twelve sibts (a term
applied to the descendants of illustrious families, particularly to the sons of Jacob and by extension to the
twelve tribes of Israel). He was born in the land of Canaan, a region of Syria; he saw the eleven stars, the
sun, and the moon prostrating themselves before him; he was then seventeen years old. This vision rendered
jealous his brothers, who sold him to people of Madian. These led him to Egypt and ceded him to a general of
Pharaoh in whose house he remained twelve months, after which the wife of El 'Aziz asked him to satisfy her
desires. Joseph having refused it, was falsely accused, and thrown into prison where he remained ten years.
One says other things still. He remained in prison until Pharaoh and the baker of the king had the two dreams
(that one knows); Joseph explained them; the two officers came out, but the cup-bearer forgot Joseph for two
years, until the time when Pharaoh saw in a dream the cows and the ears. The cup-bearer then spoke of Joseph
to the king who had him come and recounted to him his dreams. Joseph having explained them, one had him come
out of prison; he was then thirty years old, and the king named him vizier. From that moment to the arrival
of Jacob in Egypt, there elapsed nine years, comprising the seven years of abundance and two of the years of
dearth. At his arrival in Egypt, Jacob had 130 years, and his family was composed of seventy persons: from his
arrival to the birth of Moses, there passed 130 other years; Jacob had died seventeen years after his entry
into Egypt, at the age of 147 years. The sibts, dreading the resentment of Joseph, said to him: "Your father
asked that you pardon your brothers, for your brothers and you are the servants of God, of the God of your
father." "Have no disquiet," answered Joseph, weeping, and he made them generous promises that he fulfilled.
And Joseph died at the age of 110 years, and God is the most knowing.

[PDF p. 767]

CHAPTER LXXXIII
OF WHAT HAS BEEN SAID OF THE FAYOUM, OF ITS CANALS, AND OF ITS VILLAGES

Formerly, says El Ya'qoubi, one said "Egypt and the Fayoum," because of the importance of the Fayoum and the
great number of its inhabitants; it is from there that came the best wheat, and one fabricated there the
kheïch (a coarse light linen cloth). According to El Mas'oudi, the word El Fayoum signifies a thousand days
(alf youm).

The Fayoum, says El Qoda'ï, is a town founded by the prophet Joseph by divine inspiration. It contained three
hundred sixty villages of which each could provision Egypt for one day; the entire province could therefore
provide for the needs of Egypt for the whole year. A flood of twelve cubits sufficed to water it; the surplus
could cause no damage, for Joseph had regulated the course of the water and had taken his measures in such a
fashion that the water penetrated there without interruption, contained by means of dikes of piled stones; it
is in this aim that he constructed Allahoun.

In the Fayoum, says Ibn Radouan, one stores the water of the Nile, and the region can be sown several times per
year. Thus, you see that this water, when it is released, alters the color and the taste of the (rest of the)
Nile; this state of things is particularly remarkable in the lake that exists at the height of summer at Saft
and at Nahia and higher still to the confines of the Fayoum. This state of things is very prejudicial to the
inhabitants of the town -- that is, of Fostat -- above all when the wind of the South blows; for the Fayoum is
to the south and at a distance rather far from Fostat. In his book "Guide for the science of the tax," the
cadi Abou-l Hanay Aly, son of the Cadi al Moutamin Thiqat el daulat Abou 'Amr Othman ben Youssef El Qoraïshi
El Makhoumi,

[PDF p. 768]

explains himself thus: These districts form what there is most beautiful for the ordering, their (cultivable)
land is of the most extended, and the quality of their soil of the best; some of them however have become
sterile following the abandonment of the inhabitants and the invasion of the sands that have covered the
greatest part of them. I have had under my eyes a register drawn up by Abou Ishaq Ibrahim ben Gafar ben el
Hanay ben Ishaq, in which he had inscribed the canals of the provinces that had been neglected and the
villages that rose on their banks. I report it here, although some have disappeared, others have changed name,
others finally so well disappeared that one no longer knows the emplacement of them; I give it so that one may
realize what is cultivation today, and that whoever would desire to put back into cultivation as much as he
could of what has become sterile and would wish to make good administration may inform himself there to learn
what the locality would absorb of water. Here is the copy of it:

Register where is exposed the situation of the principal canals of Medinet El Fayoum, their emplacement, the
water that each village absorbs of them, the regulations concerning the closing and the opening of the dikes,
the distribution and the regulation of the waters, and the fixed epoch. Made in Djoumada II of the year 422
[26 May to 24 June 1031]. We begin with the aid of God and his benevolent assistance by recalling the state of
the principal branch from which are derived these canals, then we will recall there what is indispensable for
its good upkeep.

Great Canal of Fayoum. The water is brought to this canal by the little branch (of the Nile) named El Manha of
the stone of Joseph. The branch is above (the canal), near a mountain named seat of the sorceress in the
province of Achmouneïn. It waters some of the villages of Ashmoun, of Qeïs, and of Ahnas; on its two banks are
numerous villages that draw their water there with which they water the vines that grow there.

The stone of Joseph is a wall constructed of bricks and of that lime that the ancients named sâroûg; it is a
compound of lime and of oil. The construction of it is oriented from north to south, and ends by its southern
extremity at another wall constructed in the same fashion and directed exactly from the west to the east. Two
buttresses, detaching themselves from it, form for it a belt (that is, for the second wall) at its extremity:
its length is two hundred

[PDF p. 769]

[OF WHAT HAS BEEN SAID OF THE FAYOUM, continued]

practical cubits. The junction with this wall takes place over a length of eighty cubits on the west side by
the southern extremity of the great wall. The establishment of the great wall serves to throw back the
waters, when the level of them reaches twelve cubits, onto the town of Fayoum. The length of the junction of
the wall, which goes from the west to the east, then rejoins the buttress, then lowers from this symmetrical
buttress that faces it to the south, is fifty cubits; the part that comes after the interval comprised between
these two buttresses, which is the lowered part, is a hundred ten cubits; the extent of the lowered part is
four cubits; this lowered part is barred by a dike made of grass called labsh; the width of the region where
the water runs, which comprises the place where the labsh is and the terrain that faces it on the east side,
is forty cubits; there is the second labsh; the junction with this buttress toward the south side is made over
a length of three hundred seventy-two cubits, then on the extremity of this length connects a wall that
follows the same direction to the stone of Joseph, built of stone, whose length on the eastern line is a
hundred cubits, then it lowers equally at the point of junction with this wall, over a length of twenty
cubits, the lowered part of it is two cubits; this lowered part is equally barred by a dike of grasses, called
lokbad; the length of the rest of the wall on the north side is a hundred thirty-six cubits; facing it over
all the length is a paving. There were aqueducts on arches constructed of stone that formerly sent back the
waters into the Fayoum by the old canal today obstructed; these arch-aqueducts were provided with gates; they
were formerly to the number of ten. The length of the great wall is in total about nine hundred seventy-two
practical cubits, not counting the wall that extends from the west to the east. The great wall extends without
interruption on the two sides and goes to join the mountain, and one finds traces of it at the height of
summer, but these traces do not form a straight line.

[PDF p. 770]

As for the width of this wall, it is variable, and diminishes in approaching the summit. The upper part as well
as what one sees of the lower part has a width of sixteen cubits. Openings are made there for the flow of the
waters; these openings are formed of tubes of colored glass similar to blue enamel or souleïmânî. This wall is
a splendid marvel by the grandeur and the ability of its construction. It is indeed a construction that
rivals the tower of Alexandria and the Pyramids. The most surprising is that the Nile makes its waters pass
there since the time of Joseph until present, and that its solidity has not been shaken. Today, the waters are
carried from the river to Médinet el Fayoum, by means of the great canal of the Fayoum which passes between
the territories of the two villages of Damounah and of Al Lahoun and waters the fields of these two villages
and of many others. One irrigates the vines by means of machines set in movement by oxen. When the waters of
the Nile are too low to cover the lands, it is again the oxen that raise the water necessary for the
cultivations. The water passes from the great canal to the canal of El Aouasa which is closed and opened
without determined rule, and whose waters are distributed without fixed plan. This canal passes at the village
of Bayad and fills the pond that is in this place and other ponds. From these set out canals of derivation,
each of which receives the water necessary for the irrigation of the terrains they cross; the canal then
continues and reaches the village of El Aousiah El Koubra, whence derive two canals special to the locality
and whose intake is regulated. The palms and the other trees of the region are watered by this canal, and on
its banks rises a mill actuated by the water. Farther, are formed three canals of derivation that end at the
village of Martinah; one of them is special to this village, the second waters a great number of domains, and
the third goes to carry its waters to a nursery of palms where are found sakiehs (irrigation machines) and
gardens that have been destroyed, and where is an enclosure of sycamores; houses rose in the alleys of palms.
The canal then passes to a second nursery similar to the first and arrives at the village of Goubah whose
reservoir it fills; there it forms three canals of derivation end to end above which is an abandoned canal;
they water a great number of villages. The water brought by the canal arrives finally at Bâtas where it
terminates. On the banks of the great canal, beyond the canal of El Fayoum, extend plains of silt that are
watered by the waters flowing from the great canal itself,

[PDF p. 771]

thanks to special water-intakes. At the moment of the lowering of the Nile, one stretches nets at these
water-intakes for the fishing. The great canal then arrives, to the right of whoever directs himself toward El
Fayoum, at a canal named:

CANAL OF SAMASTOUS. It waters Samastous and other villages as well as numerous domains that extend to the
desert to the east and to the south, and cover the space comprised between this canal and the canal of El
Avasa. Farther, the great canal continues to the:

CANAL OF DAHALAH. This canal waters a great number of villages; on its banks one cultivates the rice and other
cereals. Then the great canal forms three other canals and arrives at the:

CANAL OF BEINTAWAH. There are found there three ancient gates from the time of Joseph, each two practical
cubits wide; the water after having crossed the first gate ends again at two gates from the time of Joseph.
The rule is to close this canal and all the derived ones from the second to the last day of Hathor; one opens
it from the 1st to the 20th of Kihak to close it again until the 10th of Toubah, to reopen it on the eve of
the feast of the Baptism until the end of Toubah; one closes it again from the 1st to the 2nd of Amchir; one
reopens it until the 10th of Barmahat; then one leaves it open until the 10th of Barmoudah, the day on which
one distributes the waters; the cultivations that bordered the northern part of this canal are abandoned; it
waters a great number of villages. For this canal one has cut under the mountain a vaulted conduit by which the
waters flowed when they were too abundant. Then the great canal arrives at the:

CANAL OF DALAH, one of the derived ones, which is opened and closed and whose waters are distributed and
managed following the rule indicated above; it is to the left of whoever directs himself toward the town (of
the Fayoum). This canal has two gates of stone built in the time of Joseph and each two cubits and a quarter
wide. It waters a great number of villages, central ones or others. In the middle of this canal is a spillway
that one opens at the time of the flood to permit the waters to flow into the great reservoir; at the
extremity of this is another spillway provided with gates, which were, it is said, formerly of iron. When

[PDF p. 772]

the water is too abundant, one opens the gates and the water flows toward the west and goes, it is said, to
Santariah. On the banks of its two canals were gardens and numerous vines that one watered by means of the
ox-machines. Then the great canal arrives at the:

CANAL OF EL MAGNOUNAH. One has given it this name because of the enormous quantity of water it receives (El
Magnounah means "the mad woman"). For the closing and the rest, one follows the rules already reported. It
waters numerous villages and makes turn numerous mills. The surplus of the waters of the villages of the South
pours itself into the canal and into the lake situated at the extremity of the Fayoum, in the vicinity of the
mountain of Abou Qitrân; into this lake also pour the waters coming from the villages of the North; it is the
one that one calls the great lake. Then the great canal continues its route and arrives at the:

CANAL OF TELALAH. This canal has two gates dating from Joseph, built solidly of stones and each two cubits and
two thirds wide; there is no regulation touching the closing or the opening of this canal, nor for the
distribution and the repartition of the waters; when the flood is insufficient, one contents oneself with
establishing a dike of grasses; some quarters of the town (of the Fayoum) feed themselves on this canal as
well as a great quantity of lands and numerous villages; it is there that is found the water-intake of the
canal of El Batash where goes the excess of the waters; it is provided with gates that one closes until the
water has reached a determined level above the elevated lands. If the closing-dike undergoes some damage, it
is repaired proportionally by the villages that this canal waters. Then the great canal arrives at two other
canals that set out from its two banks to the north and to the south, after which it reaches:

The CANAL OF SAMOUAH, situated to the right of whoever directs himself toward the town of the Fayoum. It is
one of the derived ones: it is provided with two gates from the time of Joseph, each two cubits and a half
wide. It follows the rules given previously; it waters numerous domains and a great quantity of villages. Then
there detach from it four canals of derivation provided with gates and different canals that water a great
number of villages.

CANAL OF TABDOUD. In the bed of this canal springs a source of sweet water

[PDF p. 773]

with which one waters the neighboring lands when the canal is closed. One discovered this source one year when
the water was lacking, and when one was digging at this place to make a well; it is then that the source
appeared and sufficed for the needs. Then the great canal arrives at different canals from which detach
secondary branches dating from the time of Joseph. These canals have gates of the same epoch, and for the
opening and the closing of which there are established rules; numerous villages feed themselves there. The
regulation of the canals requires that all be closed from the 10th of Hathor to the end of this month; one
opens them for twenty days from the 1st of Kihak; they are closed from the 21st of Kihak to the eve of the
feast of the Baptism; on the day of the feast, one opens them until the end of the month of Tobah; one closes
them from the 1st to the 20th of Amchir; on the 21st, one opens them until the 20th of Barnahat; one opens them
again during the first ten days of Barmoudah; one puts them in state, then one occupies oneself with the
repartition of the waters; each district receives the quantity of water that suits it following rules
perfectly known to the inhabitants. I have abridged the name of the villages reported in the register, because
most of them are ruined. And God is the most knowing.

[PDF p. 774]

CHAPTER LXXXIV
OF THE CONQUEST OF THE FAYOUM, OF THE AMOUNT OF ITS REVENUES, AND OF THE ADVANTAGES IT PRESENTS

Ibn 'Abdel Hakem recounts that when the Muslims had achieved the conquest, 'Amr ben El 'As sent troops of
cavaliers toward the neighboring villages, but the Muslims were a whole year without knowing the emplacement
of the Fayoum, when a man came to speak to them of it. 'Amr sent with him Rabi'at ben Habeish ben 'Arfatah El
Sadfi. The expedition, after a very long march in the desert, having met nothing, had decided to return on its
steps, but their guides said to them: "Do not hasten to leave; if one has lied to you, it will always be
possible for you to do what you wish." They advanced therefore a little more, and all at once there surged
before them the countryside of the Fayoum; they penetrated there, and without there being combat, the
province fell into their hands. One says also: Malek ben Na'mak El Sadafi, the same that one calls the man
with the chestnut horse, set out one day on his mount into the desert without knowing that beyond extended the
Fayoum, but when he had seen the countryside, he returned to inform 'Amr of it. One says again: 'Amr ben El
'As had sent into the Said Qeïs ben El Hareth, who marched until he arrived at El Qeïs, a village where he
stopped and to which he gave his name. Remaining without news of him, 'Amr was disquieted, and Rabi'ah ben
Habeïch proposed himself to go to the discovery. He set out therefore on his mare and, crossing the river,
learned what he desired to know. He had set out, one said, on the side of the Orient and had not stopped until
the Fayoum. His mare was named the Blind One. And God is the most knowing.

In his book "The Merits of Egypt," El Kandi expresses himself thus: Among the provinces of Egypt is found the
province of the Fayoum which comprises three hundred sixty villages, a number answering to the number of the
days

[PDF p. 775]

of the year; all these villages are always watered by a sufficient quantity of water. If there comes a year
when the Nile is insufficient, each village can provide for one day for the needs of the country of Masr.
There is not in the world another country than this province that has been built by (divine) inspiration, nor
that is more precious, nor more abundant in goods, nor more furrowed with canals. If one compares to the
canals of the Fayoum those of Basra and of Damascus, the advantage remains to the first. A great number of
intelligent and instructed people have sought what were the revenues and the riches of the Fayoum, but they
were so considerable that they had to abandon the researches. One has made the count of the lands that in this
province belong to no Muslim nor to any of their tributaries and of which the rich and the poor people can
equally make use, and one has found more than seventy categories of these terrains.

According to Ibn Zoulaq cited by El Kandi in his book of the Documents relative to the emirs of Egypt, the
Fayoum, that year -- that is, in the year 366 -- brought to Kafour El Ikhshidi six hundred twenty thousand and
some dinars.

[PDF p. 776]

CHAPTER LXXXV
OF THE TOWN OF EL NAHRIRIEH

It was a fief constituted to ten soldiers of the halqah (the royal guard of the Ayyubid and Mameluke sultans),
one of whom was Chems addîn Sonqor al Sa'dî; he had removed a part of the terrain from cultivation to
establish there a stable for his beasts and his equipages; his co-beneficiaries complained of it to the
sultan Al Malik al Mansour Qalaoun who interrogated him on this subject. He answered: I wish to establish
there a mosque where the Khotbah will be made; the sultan granted him the authorization of it; and the
construction of it was begun toward the end of the year 683 and finished in 685; the sultan had a minbar made
there; the (Friday) assembly was held there, and that until our days; Al Sa'dî created shops along the mosque;
he remained proprietor of them until his death; the inheritance of them passed to his sons 'Izz eddin Khalil
and Rokn eddin 'Omar, who sold them some time after to the emir Cheïkhou al 'Omarî. The latter had them enter
into the waqf that he constituted to the khânakâh and to the mosque that he created at the Khatt Salibeh of
the mosque of Ibn Touloun outside Cairo. The construction of the mosque brought other constructions in the
region which peopled itself and became one of the towns of the country of Egypt where were even installed
workshops of weaving of silk. Sonqor rose by degrees in the service (of the sultan) until being part of the
emirs, became lieutenant of the mamluks of the sultan. It is he who created the sa'idiah madrasah outside
Cairo near Hadarat al baqar, "the hall of the oxen," in the space comprised between the citadel of the
mountain and Birkat el fil, "the pond of the elephant," in the year 715; he constructed also a ribât for the
women; he had a pronounced taste for constructions, loved also the cultivations; he possessed great goods, and
his exterior manifested opulence. Later, he withdrew to Tripoli, where he died in the year 728.

[END OF THE SECOND PART.]

========================================
TABLE OF CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST AND SECOND PARTS
(with the page numbers of the original Bouriant edition)
========================================

FIRST PART

Translator's Preface ... i–xlv
Author's Preface ... 1
Introduction. Of the Eight Principles ... 7
Chapter I. Glance at the figure of the sky ... 13
Chapter II. Of the form of the earth and the distribution of its climes ... 23
Chapter III. Of the situation of Egypt on the earth and its place among the seven climes ... 36
Chapter IV. Limits and orientation of Egypt ... 38
Chapter V. Of the sea of Qolzoum ... 42
Chapter VI. Of the sea of Roum ... 45
Chapter VII. Of the origin of the name of Masr, of its meaning, and of the different names of Egypt ... 48
Chapter VIII. Glance at the relations of Egypt with religion ... 61
Chapter IX. Of the particularities one meets in Egypt ... 69
Chapter X. Of the marvels that existed in Egypt in the way of talismans, temples, and other similar things ... 85
Chapter XI. Of the hiding-places and treasures that the Egyptians call montaleb (things sought) ... 112
Chapter XII. Of the destruction of the riches of Egypt ... 117
Chapter XIII. Of the character of the Egyptians, of their manners and their temperament ... 120
Chapter XIV. A few words on the particularities of the Nile ... 141
Chapter XV. Of the source of the Nile and its course ... 143
Chapter XVI. Refutation of those who think that the flood of the Nile is not due to a torrent ... 154
Chapter XVII. Of the measuring of the Nile and of its flood ... 162
Chapter XVIII. Of the bridge on which one crossed the Nile ... 173
Chapter XIX. Of what has been said about the water of the Nile, in praise or in blame ... 174
Chapter XX. Of the marvels of the Nile ... 184
Chapter XXI. A few words on the means of foreseeing the state of the Nile each year ... 191
Chapter XXII. Of the feast of the Martyrs ... 194
Chapter XXIII. Of the canals derived from the Nile ... 198
Chapter XXIV. Of the state of Egypt in the first times ... 204
Chapter XXV. Of the provinces of Egypt and of its nomes ... 206
Chapter XXVI. In what fashion one proceeded in Egypt to dig the canals and raise the dikes, etc., destined to retain the water of the Nile and to distribute it at the opportune time ... 211
Chapter XXVII. Of the sum of the revenues of Egypt in ancient times ... 214
Chapter XXVIII. How the Muslims organized the taxes at the moment of the conquest of Egypt, and of the situation in which Egypt and the Copts found themselves in this regard ... 218
Chapter XXIX. Of the uprisings of the Copts and what came of them ... 227
Chapter XXX. Of the arrival of the Arabs in the countryside of Egypt, how they seized the cultivations to live, and what events accompanied their arrival ... 229
Chapter XXXI. Of the farming of the lands of Egypt after the diffusion of Islamism among the Copts and the establishment of the Arabs, and of what happened until the second cadastre of El-Naser ... 235
Chapter XXXII. Of the last cadastre of El-Naser ... 250
Chapter XXXIII. Of the divan ... 260
Chapter XXXIV. Of the divan of the troops and the army ... 262
Chapter XXXV. Of the parceling and of the fiefs ... 274
Chapter XXXVI. Of the divan of the revenue and the tax ... 281
Chapter XXXVII. Of the revenues of Egypt under Islam ... 283
Chapter XXXVIII. Of the diverse lands of Egypt and the distribution of the cultivations ... 288
Chapter XXXIX. Classification of the revenues of Egypt ... 297
Chapter XL. Of the pyramids ... 321
Chapter XLI. Of the statue named "the Terrible" ... 351
Chapter XLII. Of the mountains ... 355
Chapter XLIII. Of Mount Moqattam ... 356
Chapter XLIV. Of the Red mountain ... 360
Chapter XLV. Of the mountain of Yachkour ... 361
Chapter XLVI. Of the Observatory (el-Rased) ... 363

SECOND PART

Chapter I. Of the towns of the land of Egypt ... 371
Chapter II. Of the town of Amsous, of its marvels and its kings ... 374
Chapter III. Of the town of Memphis and its kings ... 388
Chapter IV. Of the town of Alexandria ... 413
Chapter V. Of Alexander ... 430
Chapter VI. Of the era of Alexander ... 434
Chapter VII. Of the difference there is between Alexander and Dhu'l Qorneïn, who are two different personages ... 437
Chapter VIII. Of the kings who reigned at Alexandria after Alexander ... 440
Chapter IX. Of the lighthouse (Pharos) of Alexandria ... 444
Chapter X. Of the circus that was at Alexandria and of some other marvels ... 452
Chapter XI. Of the column of the masts (Pompey's Pillar) ... 457
Chapter XII. Glance at what has been said on the subject of Alexandria ... 463
Chapter XIII. Of the conquest of Alexandria ... 469
Chapter XIV. Of what the Muslims did at Alexandria and of the uprisings of the Greeks ... 476
Chapter XV. Of the lake of Alexandria ... 484
Chapter XVI. Of the canal of Alexandria ... 485
Chapter XVII. Collection of traditions on Alexandria ... 494
Chapter XVIII. Of the town of Athrib ... 502
Chapter XIX. Of the town of Tennis ... 504
Chapter XX. Of the town of Sa ... 521
Chapter XXI. Of the sand of the Occident ... 523
Chapter XXII. Of the town of Balbaïs ... 526
Chapter XXIII. Of the country of El Ouaradah ... 528
Chapter XXIV. Of the town of Eilah ... 530
Chapter XXV. Of the town of Madian ... 537
Chapter XXVI. End of the accounts concerning the town of Madian ... 541
Chapter XXVII. Of the town of Faran ... 543
Chapter XXVIII. Of the land of Gofar ... 544
Chapter XXIX. Of the Said of Egypt ... 545
Chapter XXX. Of the cataracts -- survey of the accounts concerning Nubia ... 549
Chapter XXXI. Of the course of the Nile from the province of 'Alouah and of the different peoples who live on its banks ... 554
Chapter XXXII. Of the Bedjahs, who are, it is said, of the race of the Berbers ... 561
Chapter XXXIII. Of the town of Assouan ... 572
Chapter XXXIV. Of Bilaq (Philae) ... 577
Chapter XXXV. Of the wall of the Old Woman ... 578
Chapter XXXVI. Of the tribute (baqt) ... 580
Chapter XXXVII. Of the desert of 'Aïdhab ... 588
Chapter XXXVIII. Of the town of Louqsor ... 591
Chapter XXXIX. Of Baliana ... 592
Chapter XL. Of Samhoud ... 593
Chapter XLI. Of Argenous ... 594
Chapter XLII. Of Abou Bat ... 595
Chapter XLIII. Of Mellawi ... 596
Chapter XLIV. Of the town of Ansena ... 597
Chapter XLV. Of El Qeïs ... 599
Chapter XLVI. Of Darout Bilhassah ... 601
Chapter XLVII. Of Sakar ... 602
Chapter XLVIII. Of Miniet el Khasib ... 603
Chapter XLIX. Of Miniet el Nasek ... 604
Chapter L. Of Gizeh ... 605
Chapter LI. Of the prison of Joseph ... 609
Chapter LII. Of the village of Tersa ... 612
Chapter LIII. Miniet Andounah ... 613
Chapter LIV. Of Ousim ... 614
Chapter LV. Of Miniet Aqabah ... 615
Chapter LVI. Of Helouan ... 617
Chapter LVII. Of the town of El Arish ... 622
Chapter LVIII. Of the town of Farma ... 625
Chapter LIX. Of the town of Qolzoum ... 629
Chapter LX. El Tih ... 631
Chapter LXI. Of the town of Damietta ... 632
Chapter LXII. Of Shata ... 666
Chapter LXIII. Of the route that leads from Masr to Damascus ... 669
Chapter LXIV. Of the town of Hatein ... 672
Chapter LXV. Of the town of El Raqah ... 673
Chapter LXVI. Of Aïn Shams ... 674
Chapter LXVII. Of Mansourah ... 683
Chapter LXVIII. El Abbassah ... 685
Chapter LXIX. Of the town of Qoft in the Said of Egypt ... 686
Chapter LXX. Of the town of Dendérah ... 690
Chapter LXXI. Of the oases of the interior ... 691
Chapter LXXII. Of the town of Santariah ... 695
Chapter LXXIII. Of the oases of the exterior ... 697
Chapter LXXIV. Of the town of Qous ... 699
Chapter LXXV. Of the town of Esné ... 701
Chapter LXXVI. Of the town of Edfou ... 702
Chapter LXXVII. Of the town of Ahnas ... 703
Chapter LXXVIII. Of the town of El Bahnasa ... 704
Chapter LXXIX. Of the town of Ashmouneïn ... 709
Chapter LXXX. Of the town of Akhmîm ... 711
Chapter LXXXI. Of the town of El 'Oqab ... 714
Chapter LXXXII. Of the town of El Fayoum ... 718
Chapter LXXXIII. Of what has been said of the Fayoum, of its canals, and of its villages ... 734
Chapter LXXXIV. Of the conquest of the Fayoum, of the amount of its revenues, and of the advantages it presents ... 740
Chapter LXXXV. Of the town of El Nahririeh ... 742

[END OF THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS — END OF THE WORK.]
